
Motion Controls

What some people seem to forget these days is that there once was a time where everyone and their dog wanted motion-controlled videogames. The field of computer graphics always had simulation has a goal. Using systems, we could simulate reality, and using graphics technologies we could visualize those simulations.

But then computer graphics applications started including interactive elements. It was at this point that in addition to simulating a world, there was a desire to simulate the way a user could interact with that world. You can see this by looking at the earliest cave automatic virtual environments, or just CAVEs for short, built in the early 90’s. Yeah, you know that one VR battlefield 3 video everyone has seen? Yeah, that came from technology created a quarter of a century ago.

So fast forward a couple of years and some nutcases at Nintendo say, hey, guys, imagine if you could play games with this! (tv remote) And the madmen, they actually freaking did it.

The Wii was a huge step. I mean, literally one day there was no commercially available simulative control solution for games on the market, and the next day, boom, there was. Unlike most technology, you didn’t see a slow progression towards it, you just woke up one day and could play tennis in your living room.

It did a really good job fulfilling a desire basically everyone had. Like, I remember the market just for renting Wii consoles out to people for weekends, like, just to play Wii Sports, just that was huge. But of course, the cost was cheap and the hardware was weak, so obviously some concessions had been made.

Take the tennis game for example. You’ve probably never put much thought into how exactly it works, but I’m going to explain to you now how the entire game functions based on 3 inputs, 2 of which could realistically just be buttons.

So, what you think is happening is that the remote in your hand is realistically transmitting your exact movements to the character on screen. What’s actually happening is, well, you’ve got a racket, right? And when the ball comes, you want to hit it. So imagine the length of this racket is a measure of time. The earlier you swing, the, the higher up on the racket will be the collision point with the ball. If you hit the ball at the earliest point, from the tip of the racket, you’ll send the ball far into the same direction as your swing, so if you’re swinging from left to right, you’ll send it to the right. If you swing the racket at the latest point though, the ball will be sent mostly straight forward.

So, the two most important inputs are the direction of the swing, which you must get right otherwise you’ll miss the ball altogether, and the swing itself, which in the game is controlled by the waggle. You could imagine however a controller with two buttons, one for a right swing and one for a left swing that could serve the same purpose as this remote. The only other input the tennis game takes is the force of the swing, which admittedly is pretty critical when it comes to selling you on the feeling of actually playing, but yeah.

So motion controlled games have been around for a while, people have kind of gotten over them for the most part. I assume we’ve all had our fair share of experiences with them. So, I’m gonna ask you a question, what game has the best motion controls?

Now everyone probably has a different answer for this based on preference, and evidently you know my answer to this already based on the title of this video, and you know, if you were asking a slightly different question, say for example “what game makes the most appropriate use of motion controls”, I’d probably have to say Splatoon because that gyro aiming is to dye for homie.

What I’m talking about are games where motion control isn’t an optional feature and isn’t a one-off gimmick, I’m considering games whose central mechanics are linked to simulative control, where real world skills are transferred to the game space. If you have bad aim, you’ll be bad at this game. If you’re bad at boxing, you’ll be bad at this game.

So let’s talk about that for a minute. For a lot of people, the answer to the question posed would probably be wii sports boxing. Of the entire wii sports package, it’s the most complex game and the only one to make use of the nunchuck attachment. Motion control is absolutely central to it, but again, once you understand the actual scope of its gameplay, you realize exactly how simple it really is.


Wii Sports Boxing

So in the boxing game you have 3 positions you can hold the wii remote and nunchuck in. Hold them vertically to cover your face, rotate them 90 degrees forward to cover your body, and tilt them downwards to cover your belt. From each of these positions, you have two possible inputs that allow for the execution of two types of punches. Waggle the controller forward for a straight punch, and waggle it sideways to perform a hook, unless you're in the lowest position, then that’ll do an uppercut. That’s probably why you’ve had trouble launching uppercuts in the game, unless you know the right combination of tilt and waggle direction, it’s hard to figure out. You can also tilt the controllers to either side in order to dodge which you can use the opportunity from to counter, but that’s about it. I happen to be a pro at this thing though, was anyone here around for that non-stop boxing streaming I did a few years back? That was fun. Hey no experience is wasted here!

So yes, this game is much more complex than the others, but still once you break it down, it’s not that deep. The only related inputs are rotation and direction. Another issue is that the controls/movements for some moves, the one I highlighted being the uppercut, are not given to the player and are somewhat unintuitive. Furthermore, the game offers you no way to modify the controls. I mean, basically every game includes some sorts of settings for control stick sensitivity or alternate control schemes, and they do that because it's needed. Not every player has the same preferences. When you’re asking a player to actually move their body though, there’s definitely some choice needed from the players end as to how they want their motions to be interpreted by the system. Forcing a player to commit to an awkward arm gesture without the option to modify it is crappy, especially when the gesture required isn’t afforded to the player very well.

I mean, everyone looks back at this game fondly, I do to, but dude, the gesture for punching someone in the gut is to hold the wii remote forward and plunge, like you’re stabbing a guy. This isn’t boxing. As a result of stuff like this, real world skill isn’t transferred into the game. Remembering poorly afforded gestures will beat actual boxing skill. I mean, imagine how much better the game would have been if you could synchronize motions to each action, similar to button mapping. I mean, the way the game works is that is takes input from the wii remotes and maps them to actions, executing the most likely action. Imagine if it instead mapped those inputs against ones you had set yourself, that would be ideal.


Resident Evil 4 - Wii Edition

Now, not all motion-centric games need to be fully reliant on motion controls like boxing. A game can tie it’s primary modes of interaction to motion and reserve other aspects of player control to traditional analog and button controls. A good case study for this is Resident Evil 4 Wii Edition, or the PlayStation Move version of Resident Evil 5, if you know, you’re one of the 3 people who played it.

So resident evil may not have been entirely motion controlled, but all of its offensive commands used the set-up. Aiming non-scoped weapons was done entirely through the use of the pointer, even giving you a little on-screen reticle as a substitute for the laser pointer. Knifing was also done using controller waggle, a gesture that additionally allowed an exclusive feature to be added to the wii version, the quick-knife. This move allowed you to immediately pull out the knife and swipe at a nearby enemy, box or barrel, doing reduced damage but doing it much faster than manually equipping the knife and aiming at the desired target.

The addition of a pointer and waggle gesture in Resident Evil 4 greatly improved the controllability of the character’s offensive moves, and let’s just say that unlike the other versions of the game, nobody called this version clunky and/or slow.

But therein lies the problem. That clunkyness, that slowness, that’s what the game, RE4, was designed for. Simply extending the controls of a survival horror game means that the original intended experience will no longer be accessible. Improving the fidelity of the control of a character is in a way a power-up, the ultimate power-up. The player’s accuracy and aim speed start off many orders above the original. I mean, just look at the shooting range, this optional mini-game is crazy difficult to do with a control stick, but using a pointer trivializes it.

Unless the antagonizing characters, or whatever other actors may serve as a challenge in the game also receive some sort of improvement, this one-sided change disturbs the balance of the challenge of the game.

Now, in the particular case of RE4, it’s forgivable. Why? Well because RE4 naturally features a well hidden dynamic difficulty system, check out Mark Brown’s video on the subject for more details. So the aggressiveness and apparent intelligence of enemies is derived from the player’s performance throughout the game. If you suck, enemies will react much slower. Now, this system is really great and is worth tons of praise, and even though the motion controlled gameplay makes the game much easier to handle, what happens is that everyone playing the Wii Version ends up playing against the fastest and smartest enemies possible. So what’s important to know is that they didn’t purposely make these enemies tougher in order to counteract the player’s enhanced abilities, this enemy behavior rather is a part of every version of the game, just, in the Wii Version it’s very easy to unlock it you could say.

That’s probably one of the reasons the Wii Edition is said to be the definitive RE4 experience. Aside from the controls just feeling so smooth, the enemies are always on their best behavior.


Recap of issues with motion controlled games

So just to recap, we’ve identified two major issues that can affect a user’s experience while playing motion controlled games.

First, the complex gesture-based simulative controls need to have great affordance and should be modifiable to some capacity by a user. That’s to say it should be clear how to perform each action using the peripherals available, and if it’s not, the player should be able to choose how they’d prefer to articulate their inputs.

I mean, you know what, even RE4 is guilty of this. The Wii Remote, it’s got a trigger underneath, you know, like a gun. You know how you shoot a gun? You pull the trigger. You know how you shoot in RE4? You press the A button. This contradicts your mental model of a firearm. You’re using the action you use to change channels on your TV in order to shoot at zombies. This is, like, the worst possible UX. How did anyone let this happen? And why can’t you change the control scheme?

Second, a game’s difficulty balance must be considered when empowering a player with high fidelity control over their character’s action. The idea is that you want to put everyone on the same playing field. Giving too much ability to one side or the other can break a game, and designing challenges, specifically enemies around this, that’s hard.



So, what’s the best motion controlled game? Is it this? Uh, no, no not at all. (Defend your castle)


Hear me out for a second, considering the two issues we’ve identified, I think that the multiplayer mode of Call of Duty 4 on the Wii, subtitled REFLEX, addresses both of them in, surprisingly, probably the most optimal ways.


Call of Duty REFLEX

First, let’s talk about the controls themselves. So as you can imagine, in COD4 on the wii, you use the control stick on the nunchuck to move your character and the wii remote pointer to aim your weapon. However what’s really interesting is that the wii pointer movement doesn’t perform the same behavior as flicks of a right analog stick or movement of a mouse, rather it’s something different all together.

In the center of your screen you have a free-aim zone. You can point your weapon anywhere within this area without it changing your point of view. However, pointing outside of this zone will cause your camera to rotate itself in the direction you’re now pointing. So if you want to aim to the side, you aim to the side, but if you want to turn your body, you aim further to that side. This is greatly different than the traditional first-person-shooter setup where your weapon’s aim is coupled directly to your camera’s point of view. Your reticle is the center of your screen, always. You may look up down left and right, but your gun always stays in the same spot in the bottom-right corner of your view.

So, here we see the primary mechanic of a shooter, the aiming, is completely reliant on motion controls.

Control Settings

Now how about the other controls, what are they? Well, um, I don’t know how to break this to you, but, um, I can’t really tell you about them because there aren’t really any standard controls.

COD4 REFLEX includes tons of control schemes, I mean tons. Some are more reliant on motion, some are less. To top it all off, you can fully customize your own. You can map any command to any button, including combinations of buttons and motion inputs.

So for example, in my custom control setting, I set the - button to be special grenades and the + button to be standard grenades. A couple of the premade sets though handle all grenades throwing with a single button. So to throw a regular grenade, you press +, but then to throw a special, you tilt the wii remote and press the same button.

There’s a whole control scheme built specifically for the wii zapper that really puts the tilts in use, it’s crazy. And the best part is that if you don’t like it, you can still make your own custom one by assigning each action to some input.

I for example didn’t like the button for reloading, so I assigned it to a shake of the nunchuck, because, like, why not? Same for knifing. The default is down on the d-pad which is a little hard to reach quickly, so I set it to a shake of the wii-remote.

Also, worth note, at the time, an fps standard feature, tilting to look around corners was never available on consoles as designers couldn’t figure out how to map it to controllers, so it remained a PC exclusive ability, that is until this game which can allow you to peek around corners by rotating the nunchuck.

So alright, great, the game lets you set your own gestures and controls, huh, that’s pretty good, that alone is sufficient to solve our first problem. Oh wait Infinity Ward, you’re not done? You can do more than this? Whaaaat?

Now, here’s where things start bouncing off the walls.

Okay, okay, look, I wouldn’t say this unless I actually meant this, and I hate making statements like this that sound unbelievable, but you can modify and change literally everything in the game to your liking.

I’m not playing around.

So you know how games, how software like this works right? Don’t worry, I’m not going into graph stuff. But basically what controls come down to is a bunch of different variables that serve as ranges, restrictions or values that are used when the system performs your character’s movement. The thing is, the developers of this game, likely realizing how particular people can be when it comes to motion controls, well, they opened everything up to you. You can spend hours just tweaking your controls. It’s that broad.

You can change your aim-zone, both for hip fire and when aiming down sights, you can change the camera rotation speed, you can choose whether or not to enable a camera lock that holds your POV in place and allows you to aim freely within it, sort of like a locked strafe but with free aim. No other game or control scheme allows you to perform this sort of movement so easily.

You can customize the pointer and reticle, I seemingly liked the opacity up last I played.

You can change your vertical and horizontal speeds when rotating your view, both from the hip and from the sights, you can choose what your character should do when you aim off-screen, whether you’d prefer a turn or a camera lock.

Like, I’m not joking when I say you can spend upwards of 20 minutes just tweaking things in the menus.

Now, the obvious comparison to be made is to The Conduit, a popular Wii exclusive first-person-shooter that was published about 5 months prior to Reflex. Now, I highlight that short time range because it indicates that both companies must have been making similar design decisions around the same time. Just because The Conduit first showcased a Dead-zone feature, doesn’t mean the Reflex team copied it. It's very likely that they came to the same designs independently of each other. What is important though is that to players, The Conduit prepared people for the sorts of interfaces COD4 would also ask them to use.

So, like I mentioned, the conduit first presented the idea of a dead-zone and also allowed for its customization. The game also allowed for a few other control parameters to be modified, nowhere as near as many as COD, but still a lot. Though, some of it was kind of silly. Like, who really cared about being able to change the placement of HUD elements, they were kind of already perfectly placed. Ooooh hoohohoh look at me I have my grenades stock in the middle of my screen.

Despite everything The Conduit did right in terms of giving the player a say in how their motion controls would work, there was one critical flaw with their settings that prevented it from being as effective a solution as it should have been. While in game, you could not change these settings.

To edit control settings, you’d have to do it from a menu outside of the main game. You can imagine the use case of someone playing the game, feeling something off, wanting to change it and having to exit the game in order to do that, only to come back and be unable to notice the difference enacted by their modification.

When it comes to changing game controls, this needs to be possible within gameplay so that a player can get a feel for it on the spot. You don’t want to go through loading screens just to test an adjustment.

In Call of Duty Reflex, the settings menu can be accessed literally whenever. Not in a game? You can do it? In singleplayer? You got it. In multiplayer? Well it doesn’t pause the match but you can make your changes mid-play.

As an example, here’s a use case that you might have actually seen live as I streamed some COD Reflex recently. During a match, I tried using my knife which I has as a shake of the wii-remote, but it failed a few times. So right after, during the same match, I went into the settings, increased the wii-remote shake sensitivity, reducing the minimum amplitude of a waggle that would be registered as input, tested it out a few times to get a feel for my custom knifing gesture, and once satisfied, I continued playing and got a knife kill later on.

So COD4 Reflex addresses the issue of customizable controls in a way that goes well above the minimum viable solution. Like I said, you can spend 20 minutes in these menus, and you can access them from any point in the game. It’s glorious.

This is the sort of game that when you do the typical shooting-range tutorial level, it actually feels like you’re learning how to use these arms.


About Multiplayer Equality

Now, something you might have noticed was that I mentioned multiplayer. This has nothing to do with the subject of today’s video, but like, as I was preparing to capture footage of this game I accidentally stumbled into a matchmaking screen which I expected would get me stuck there for a while before being disconnected, just like it had happened to me with the Conduit since Nintendo officially discontinued WFC support a few years ago, but I was absolutely shook to the bone when a match was actually made and I found myself playing Call of Duty 4 on the Wii against actual people online.

Call of Duty 4, this game doesn’t even work on Playstation 3 anymore. For some reason Activision is still supporting the Wii version of it though. Yo what the heck.


So, the other issue we identified with these sorts of games had to do with the challenge matching the player’s ability set. One quick and interesting way to solve this problem is to pit players against other players with the same control abilities. That’s why I specified that it’s the multiplayer mode that really is the best implementation of motion controls in a game. Really though, it all comes down to a single thing, a single reason why this game is such a gem.

Unlike future Call of Duty titles for the Wii and WiiU that supported standard dual-analog controllers for input, Call of Duty Reflex only supports the motion-control based wii remote and nunchuck set up.

Now, I haven’t touched on it yet, but unlike how motion controls improved player abilities in RE4, COD4’s motion controlled gameplay doesn’t equate or really compare to normal controls. It’s not worse, let's get that out of the way, but it’s certainly different. Almost solely as a result of the POV rotation speed needing to be reduced, the game is much slower in terms of movement. So what you get is a version of Call of Duty where players are much more cautious and move much slower, but are able to target enemies within their view much faster. Nobody’s zipping around, they’re looking for targets within their screen.

While traditional COD is about zipping around the map, pointing at and clicking on enemies, COD on the Wii is more like ray-tracing. You want to find a position that you can stay stable in, lock your camera and aim at targets within the dead-zone.

When you enter an online match, sure you’re using the motion controls that force you to behave differently, but so is everyone else.

Every Time someone kills you, you know that they actually had to twist their wrist to aim at you and pull a trigger to open fire on you. Every Time you see someone leaning around corners, you know someone is tilting their hard. This sort of relationship between your teammates or enemies, everyone being on the same playing-field and everyone knowing that, that’s what makes this game such a charm to experience.

No other large scale multiplayer games that I’m aware of have ever forced all players to use some degree of motion control. Everyone makes it optional. This, this is just something else.

It’s crazy because what happens is that Call of Duty, this game designed for high-speed fps action, this game with super tight mechanics, it becomes the perfect home for this slow-paced, 5 versus 5 fully motion-controlled game. Sure, some things were changed to suit the wii-version a little better, for example hip-fire accuracy is by default much better, but the new reliance on your own skill, your own reflexes, that counteracts it and supports the slower approach to battles.

If you’re sprinting in and suddenly see someone, it’s going to take you a second to reposition your camera before being able to actually engage them. If you take fire from a certain direction, you can’t immediately snap to it to find its source, it takes you a while to turn. If you want to shoot at someone, from the hip, you have to consider whether or not your own gun will obstruct your view, causing you to apply suppressive fire on an enemy rather than an accurate tracking. Knowledge that it takes a while for other players to turn can be used when picking hiding spots. Since people will generally only have the best view of what’s in front of the, staying low to the side can keep you safe and flanking is a much more possible strategy to perform.

I mean, look, I used to play a lot of COD4 on PC, a lot, and you see this map here? I’ve never seen anything like this happen here. Normally people are just running all over the place, running around trying to get their own kills, but because here each player has difficulty accessing the peripherals of their vision, players actually stick together, unintentionally form up and spread out. Rather than a total free-for-all, here everyone is holding their ground, slowly pushing forward whenever an opening is available. Risky behavior on the part of anyone will result in a quick death. You get a lot of stand-offs in this game, but it’s crazy because this isn’t the sort of gameplay you’d ever experience in any other version of call of duty.

The movement being slower and more realistic, the reduced effect of aim-assist through mandatory pointer-based aiming, which by the way is totally subject to recoil from vibrations in the controller and other unintentional movements of your hand, these housed in a game with rock freaking solid mechanics and an environment where everyone else has to deal with it too, this is the sort of game that bridges the gap between a full-on action FPS game and a battle simulator.

The battles I’ve had in these multiplayer matches have been more tense and memorable than those I’ve had in other call of duties. A room that you’d typically run straight through in a normal COD becomes a temporary shelter where you can take rest and keep an eye out for the enemy. You’re always looking for places to hold out in and pin the enemy down from. You only ever feel safe progressing forward if there’s a teammate nearby. A game that is often known for representing a very glamorous depiction of warfare, as a result of a new control scheme imposed on all players, becomes one of the most immersive and realistic simulation experiences you can ever have.


Now the single player, pfff forget about that. Just like RE4, the enemies and scenarios weren’y designed for it and we’re changed to accommodate it. It’s a total mess. Even on the easiest difficulty it’s hard to get a shot on anyone. And those walking segments, they’re just really bad with the pointer, it doesn’t feel good at all.

But that’s why I’m talking about the multiplayer only. This game, this is something you really need to play to believe. This is the game that gives me faith in the use of motion controls in competitive play. People make fun of such controls because they’re rarely done right, but doing them right, giving people complete control over their controls, and giving them all the same controls, it makes for a really engaging game.

And holy crap you can turn your guns sideways! Dude! You can just sweep a dude with an Uzi!

Last I checked, the multiplayer still works. If this video has at all peaked your interest in either the game specifically or more generally, how motion controls can work in a multiplayer setting, please consider picking this thing up. It seems to go for around 5 Canadian dollars, and World at War has the same deal, you know, being controlled exclusively through motion, so if you can pick up either it's a blast, though I don’t know if the latter still works or not.

Anyways, thanks for watching!


ENDSCREEN


So quite a while ago Mr Martin over here sends me a tweet that I may or may not dig up just to put on screen here for a second, but anyways, he’s tells me “heeeeey “I know you’re into what’s AI shit and bots and artificial partner systems in games what with your critically acclaimed videos on the subject spanning from exactly the resident evil series all the way to this one Medabots game. So hey maybe you should check out Final Fantasy 12, I think you’ll like it.”


I looked into the game and it’s reviewers and critics and immediately became familiar with exactly why it was recommended I take a look. Martin, thanks to my friend we have gathered here today.

Now let me for a moment get real, you know take myself seriously for a moment, drop this air of self-flagellation I kind of keep around for videos. If you’ve been around for a while this might be boring, I’m gonna go into a little bit of a self history lesson here which turns from my side is quite important cause there’s always a lot of new people coming here who don’t know what I’ve been up to or what I’ve been talking about for the past 3 freaking years. So, here we go.

In my relatively short time making the sorts of videos I have made on this website I’ve been come to know as “the guy” of a few different things; for instance I have for a long time been “the spongebob guy”, a title I got for making what were, at the time, some of the only … ooOOOooooh I wanna say above average videos on these then old and now older spongebob video games. I’ve also been associated with such series as Resident Evil, one of the few subjects prevalent in both pre and post renaissance eras of LambHoot. But more recently and more importantly however Pikmin. It’s easy in this space to couple yourself to people interested in certain games or discussions of them by simply covering them consistently, as I’ve learned.

Something harder to do though is tie yourself, as a creator or artist or writer or video maker, to a subject or thematic identity. The intelligence behind youtube’s search and recommended features isn’t tuned to that sort of thing just yet.

Despite that though something I tried to do a lot in the past and slowly seemed to have abandoned nowadays was what got a few folks out there calling me not the “spongebob guy”, not “the resident evil guy”, not even “the mexican guy” fuck do you guys remember when people thought I was mexican? That was like, that really kinda made me feel weird. Like, what, do Americans just assume that anyone with any sort of noticeable ethnicity must be mexican? Jesus Christ... Anyways. That thing I used to do is what got me called “the diagram guy”.

Here I was, hot kid on the block half-way through a SoEng degree, just learned me about state machines and what stands to reason IS the most powerful language, UML. You pick up the Unified Modeling Language and suddenly everything looks like a design spec ah?

So that’s what I did. Partly fueled by my passion for my set-to-be profession and that of favorite hobby PLUS feeling underrepresented in the game critiquing space at the time with most video guys hitting the artistic side really hard but barely scratching the surface or frankly even being able to talk about the inner workings of these things, ouf. I came at this with an agenda. I wanted to be one of the first of my kind. I wanted to explain really complex problems and equally complex systems built to solve them in a digestible way with high energy like a combination of the sorts of videos about games people were already watching and the performances of some of my best university lecturers. I want you to know that I have stolen certain mannerisms and expressions from my professors that I identified as things that helped me follow along in class. I’m plagiarising my profs dude. No this is beyond plagiarism, this is identity theft!

And yeah, one of the things I hit real hard with was diagrams. A lot of UML for general stuff but what was a best hit was the state machine. See, state machines are really fucking simple to plot and simple to read. It might be hard for someone who’s never thought of it that way to picture how objects and classes are broken down hierarchically, but states and actions and conditional triggers? People dig that shit man, it’s like flow-charts ++. Famously, by my standards, I formalized the entire behavior of the bot partner from Resident Evil 5 to make the point that it could be done as an exercise by any player of the game and that knowing its exact behavior imposed limits on the human player of the game. Infamously, also by my standards, I built a state machine representing the entirety of the game Five Nights at Freddy’s to prove that I didn’t poke holes in the game because it came pre-poked. I used it to critique the underlying logic of the game and expose how a bug I had less than a 0.2% chance of experiencing had no reason to exist and persist across every game in the series up to that point.

These were fun videos to make in my opinion and people’s responses to them were really good. It was clear that I was hitting some niche that people didn’t they wanted which was that of explaining highly technical processes and using formal methods and reverse engineering practices as a part a game’s critique and analysis, coming from someone with, yeah, at this point I can say, authority, specialization in this sort of stuff but keyly without the sort of dull monotone delivery you’d expect.

But I think sometime around my Breadth and Depth of the Wild videos I realized that there was a limit. I was stretching hard to make very abstract mathematical bullshit accessible and entertaining which was received by a lot of people as being a very condescending articulation of stuff that didn’t really matter.

And so that  realization was the usherer of what I’d like to call the Pathos Ethos era of LambHoot. Basically what I progressively started doing was still applying the same sort of analytical mindset given to me by my school and profession, but I was framing that with bits and pieces of myself, my personality, my experiences and feelings. It was a readjustment of the scope of my breakdowns, initially targeted at specific components of games, now instead my aim was to perform such a breakdown of my own feelings towards these games instead. This might sound like the same kind of process, but if you’re someone who works similar kinds of written video projects like I know many of y’all are, you know there’s a distinction here. My best example of this at this point is my latest video on Pikmin 3, I think that’s the best job I’ve been able to do at that and I’ve happily proven myself my adaptability, that I can pivot and learn to do new things.


But, still some of my initial motivations for my original style hold true. The disciplines of computer science and software engineering are highly underrepresented in the hobbyist critic space, probably cause they’re very busy… I can definitely understand that given my fucking experiences! And still, when people do manage to effectively communicate really complex technical topics, holy shit does everyone go wild. Like, fuck, you know how many video makers  out there have backgrounds in psychology and how interesting their works are? There’s something so special about listening to someone with an expertise in something apply that to a game in the form of an essay, and what I’m saying is that for as fucking critical as software is to games, it’s a shame that you don’t see as much of it coming up in analysis. I wanted that to change and I still do. I don’t want the only place to get cool technical content about games to be straight from the horse’s mouth via things like gdc talks and crap, and also don’t like seeing this growing problem in the critic space that is a misunderstanding of how software works and, more importantly in my opinion, how software development works.

Fuck, okay, back on track. What I wanna say here is that yeah, I’ve stepped away from an approach to dissecting games that I felt I could uniquely do and so had a lot of value, and I did this in favor of something I’ve come to enjoy more, I would say. But I think the real problem was that it just turns out not EVERY game warrants that sort of scrutiny. Some though do, and when it comes to those sorts of games, fuck man, let me be the diagram guy for just a little bit. I’m making the decision to bring it back when the discussion warrants it and the topic ai partners and bots certainly does. This is something I think I can offer some unique input on that nobody else in this space would and so I have to thank my boi Martin for affording me this opportunity to look back where I’ve come and where I am and recommending me a game honestly, context-considered, has in me awe. And right before we go into it, I’d like to invite anyone to anytime recommend me games like this they think my input would be valuable on. Let’s begin.


And with that time to take my first shit. Final Fantasy 12 actually is not a game with an ai partner system. Rather it’s a game with an ai party system where you can take what I’ll call “partially” direct control over any one member at a time, designated temporarily as the leader. What this control amounts to is really just their walking. All other actions can be handled automatically by the game’s systems and manual control can be used to override that, but that manual control extends to all characters regardless of who the current leader is. In other words, while “in control” of one character, the actions of all others are still available to be overridden which is only possible because while the game may present the illusion of real time combat, what’s actually going on here is a non-traditional interpretation of a turn-based fighting.

The way it works is that instead of a traditional turn, each character and enemy has a move timer of variable length depending on your typical rpg stuff like speeds stats and buffs. The characters queue their moves, and every time they complete an iteration the move at the front of the queue is executed. So like I said, what feels like realtime is really a reinterpretation of what a turn effectively is to you and your enemies in a turn-based game.

Now you might be wondering well, how does that work? You might have some experience in party-based turn-style combat from other rpgs, something I can capture some footage of? How about a Pokemon double battle? And if you do you know that the skidamarink of that rinky-dink is that each turn you issue commands to each party member one at a time, then in the action phase, each member of your’s and the enemy’s parties perform those actions one at a time, the order determined by some measure of speed of each character. So knowing that you might be wonder how the heck that works in an rpg game that I just described as having all turns from all active characters constantly iterating on real-time timers in parallel. If everyone is constantly fighting, how do you control them all at once? When does the game stop and give you a chance to issue commands to each member of your party? If actions are queued up and executed in order, how do you add things to that queue?

The answer is you don’t really. You don’t need to constantly command your characters in Final Fantasy 12 because each one is automated for you, each one is a bot and their ai or behavior is controlled algorithmically… which is why I was recommended it. And if past experiences with such bot systems is any indication, this might not be a good thing...


How bout we take a break for a minute and review what we’ve learned so far in our study of automated partner systems in games to see why it's such a delicate topic.

Resident Evil 5 is a bit of a weird case-study because rather than being a game built from the ground up with an ai partner, it was a game that was meant to be experienced in multiplayer with another person either splitting the screen or joining your session via network. An ai was built for the sole purpose of being a last resort, a catch-all for any player unable to get either of intended experiences to work. However the problem with that bot’s design specifically was that it didn’t behave as an agent with bare minimum amount of impact on play. Rather, unlike a human, the bot’s strict following of its coded rules, depicted here in this state machine, meant that a human player playing with the bot would have to adapt themselves to it in order to have a decent experience. The bot would not fallback on the human for guidance, rather the human had to play carefully and be sure to step within the boundaries of the bot’s rules.

The classic examples include weapon and health sharing. The bot was programmed to automatically heal themselves or their partner if their health went bellow max while they were in the cover state. This would frequently result in the partner inefficiently wasting health items on minor injuries rather than letting damage build up before spending them. The impact this had on a player was that they would need to stockpile health items themselves and not let the partner have any. With a limited inventory space though this meant that the human player would then not have enough room to hold items they were actually interested in holding, often cool weapons.

Speaking of weapons, the partner’s general combat strategy wasn’t up to snuff when it came to playing a, you know, resident evil game. For instance the best way to use the underpowered but high capacity machine gun was to shoot an enemy in a weak spot like the head which would create an opening for a melee attack, then quickly close the distance and perform that melee attack. It was the most efficient way to use that weapon both in terms of ammo consumption and damage output. The partner however would just empty clips into enemies. In the player’s hands each shot held more value, it was equivalent to a shot and a punch, but in the bot’s hands shots would be wasted quickly and lost forever to a garbage behavior. For this reason, in the early game, the human player who paid money for this game was basically forced to use the machine gun themselves and handoff instead the much more appealing shotgun to the partner which they still used inefficiently but who’s slow rate of fire mitigated that.

Resident Evil 5, omitting a single-player version of itself without a partner and including only one so easy to breakdown and so unwavering in its sub-efficient behavior changed the experience from being a cool action-oriented zombie romp through africa with a partner to forcing you into the shoes of a sidekick to the real star of the show, your supposed ai servant become master.

The issue was that creating a bot so exact in its behavior meant that the only way for a human player to be a good teammate to it would be to follow their own exact behavior, and that was not good at all. The partner was always dependable to do a certain set of things which meant that you couldn’t play the game however you wanted to play it.

It’s no surprise then that when it came to the 6th Resident Evil, the single player ai partner system was turned into something non-committal. Unlike with a real human partner in this game,  the ai partner’s health was infinite, their ammo was infinite, their inventory was not managed, weapons didn’t need to be shared, and very importantly noise was added to its behavior to prevent it from being entirely predictable and also abusable. Despite now having unlimited resources, its attack state’s rate of fire didn’t constantly max out like it did in the last game where you actually were sharing ammo. You can’t force the partner in RE6 to play the game for you but it’s also not something you need to depend on for anything. It doesn’t get in your way, it doesn’t hamper the experience at all, it does little more than just let you know its there. And its minor unpredictability makes impossible to reverse engineer and feel more alive than ever.

Key note here: while the playing experience benefits from this, the bot itself hasn’t improved. It hasn’t progressed like you would’ve hoped and expected. Instead all things that were seen as pain-points about it in the last game where patched out, so technically it's just a conceding of RE5’s partner’s crap effect on the single-player game. But when it comes to games like this which at the end of the day are entertainment, it’s not always about improving the built solution It's never that way in any context of software development. It’s about reverifying the requirements and realizing hey shit, this was never actually what a player needed in order to have the closest experience to playing with a real human partner. So let's not waste any effort improving that, instead we have to build what we should have done from the beginning which turns out is a subset of what we ended up doing in the first place.

Now all a that kinda makes the whole pursuit of dependable ai bot companions and partners in games seem hopeless, fruitless. But as we’ve learned from Medabots for the gameboy advance, that’s not actually the case. In a different context and under a different implementation, such strictly defined ai companions can serve a complimentary role to a player’s own agency. In this game for instance where each fight had the player bring in a partner to face any enemy captain with their own partner, the partner’s behavior set, though explicit at all times could be cycled through a set of available behaviors sets. That’s a whole lot of sets. What this allows for is for the leader of the team to select, before a battle begins, various predefined conducts they would like to have their partner exhibit, and then on the fly cycle through them mid-match to best compliment their own demeanor. For example when injured and in need of immediate assistance a player could force their bot partner into a non-combative, evasive healer-style, then once repaired you could issue them a partner-hunter behavior which would have them focus their offense against the enemy partner while you could take the leader. That’s a pretty shallow example, in reality the granularity of possible behaviors you could give your partner went as far as things like having them focus attacks on a specific body part of specific opponent. These commands, or rather like I said before, behavior sets were not meant to just cover general use. This was a fighting game after all, there was strategy to be found in the selection of behavior sets to take into each fight to best counteract your opponents stats and weapons and yes, even their own toggleable behavior sets. These behaviors were treated as any other integral part of the game, just like weapons or specials they had to be unlocked and equipped as parts of loadouts and I don’t think I need to explain why that’s such a cool thing.


So that brings us back here to Final Fantasy 12 and it's Exactly Defined AI Party Members, which as an aside is certainly gonna be the name of new 90’s style europop band. So far though unless made up for with some sort of controllability, rigidly natured bots in such long adventure type games don’t seem to make a lot of sense.

Like we learned from RE5’s partner, a bot’s behavior in this type of experience should be stuffed with enough noise that it can’t be exposed definitely or reverse engineered simply through long sessions of play and exposure to it. Otherwise, a bot that can be known inside and out is one that forces the player to adapt to it and this ruins the game and yada yada... Except there’s one case where this is acceptable. There’s one variable here to consider that in its presence makes it totally fine for a game to effectively present it’s ai’s blueprints and schema to the player and say “hey this is exactly without question how these bots behave”.

It is acceptable for a bot’s exact behavior to be knowable to the player only when it’s the player that designs that behavior.

Maybe though it's about time we actually talked about those exact definitions of behavior that each party member in the game has. Similar to the way it was treated in Medabots, character behavior is a founding member of the play of the game. Accessible from the same menu as things like weapons and items, behaviors, or as the game flavorfully names them, Gambits, are the laid out instructions that every member of your party follows. And if you’ve ever even barely had a glance at an introduction to any sort of programming, and you’ve never played this game, you know exactly what the fuck this is and it’s probably blowing your mind that this came out 13 fucking years ago.

And, and you’re also about to wince real hard at this next part, but fuck, okay? You know it’s really easy to call me out for over explaining things, but you’re not me. You don’t have the same perspective on my viewership as I do. Look, I know my audience, and most of them, most of you, are, with all due respect, with all due respect... idiots who only care about this one cartoon with a talking sponge. So judging for this you probably don’t know very much about anything and you probably have terrible taste in not anything in particular but in everything in particular.

So you’ve probably watched at some point a movie or tv show or bless this generation, a youtube video, where on the topic of computers someone said something along the lines of “oah it’s all a bunch of 1’s and 0’s” and you probably thought of the ratio type numerical values 1 and 0, and that’s not what the fuck that is.

In the sense that its most often used, 1 and 0 are actually short hand representations of not the words but rather the concepts of true and false. Why’s it 1 and 0 instead of T and F? Why don’t you imagine writing a few dozen of these out on an exam paper and you tell me.

See 1 and 0 represent what is the smallest possible unit of information in a world where everything is information. It’s called a bit, and it's described as being binary because it can either be one thing or another. In the case of computers this is implemented physically with electronic devices capable of two states: running a current or not. Being On or Off. A bit in a computer may be the answer to the question “does a current exist?” Yes or No. True or False. 1 or 0”.

And even though very small and absolute, abstracted you can see how quickly more can be made from it. If you give us something that can be either true or false, we can take that and line a few of em up and make up some cool rules that allow us to represent mathematical numbers with them. Then we can take these numbers and combine them in some way that we agree certain combinations represent certain letters or keys on a keyboard or other characters. Then we can take these and again following some rules we make up and all agree to follow that we bundle up maybe into two camps titled semantics and grammar which together we call language, and now we have ways of creating meaning through words, sentences, or in the case of programming languages, variables, functions, classes, methods. Languages, programming and natural, allow us now to describe as close we can the most abstract form of information we have access to, raw thought. As we think things we can use language to communicate those things in real time by speaking sentences made of words made of letters and punctuation. And then we can write programs made of elements made of characters to listen to those sentences and transcribe them. And then using some new form of information also constructed from a series of expansions of binary data we can somehow represent values of time, and then can find a way to link words in sentences to points in time using audio data, also coming from some sort of binary data. Then we can come up with a way to display these symbols on a screen with white font which is just binary data determining if a pixel should be white or not. And then we can, using these time links words and this method of display them on a screen, show them as they are spoken over a video which is a combination of frames of still images and that audio data from before. And images, those are just arrays of arrays of color, they’re just lists of colors we’d to have display one line of a certain resolution at a time to make a big rectangular shaped picture because that makes it easier for people to read. And given that we already know how numbers can be build out of strung together bits, it should be no surprise that given that any color can easily be represented by a scale of numerically measured intensities of red, green and blue, then it’s very easy to see how that can come from binary as well.

And so all the way from a machine asking itself whether or not there is an electric current, we’re here now where I’m asking myself why I’m listening to two smelly bums from different parts of the world talk about Sonic music.

Novacanoo: “And Sonic, like Crush 40 Sonic music, I love that stuff. And he, and Fantano seems to see it as lower quality music. But I just think its really fun.”

Zac: “Interesting.”

True and false, aside from being words you hear thrown around alot at a… child custody hearing… what the fuck was I thinking with this joke?

True and false, aside from that stupid joke are valuable as concepts on their own. We don’t necessarily need to build all sorts of things out of them to make them useful. Bits or truth values are to different kinds of logic, which yeah there quite a few, what numbers are to kinds of math.

In propositional logic for instance which sounds like something boring and complicated but is actually something guarantee you already quite a bit about, propositions are statements of truth that can be evaluated given the right circumstances. For instance I can’t evaluate the truth value of the proposition “the store is selling popsicles” because I don’t have enough information. But if you tell me that “if it is hot outside, the store will sell popsicles” and that “it is hot outside”, then I evaluate the statement. Given that it is hot outside and that if it is hot outside the store will sell popsicles, then true, the store will sell popsicles. And that’s the basic of the most basic type of logic math.

I’m gonna move on but here’s a little test if you’re interested. Try to evaluate this same problem if I tell it is not hot outside? What do you think the outcome will be and why? Lemme know in the comments if you want, aaay.

So what the fuck was the whole point of that whole big binary breakdown before? Well, I want to get across that even though in most cases when you hear people talk about “1s and 0s” in relation to computers they’re referring to how ultimately everything gets compiled down to binary data and that’s really interesting, this concept of true or false also plays a role as is in programming. In things like the manipulation of logic and evaluation of logical propositions.

If you’ve dabbled in programming you may have heard of something called an IF statement. See in programs often you only want certain portions of code to be executed IF a certain condition is met or if the system is in a certain state. I’ll give you a web programming example, this is something pretty standard, I’ve had to build this sort of thing before, but anyways. Your typical website might have some sort of account registration process and some features of the website should be toggled on or off depending on whether or not you’re currently logged in.

So for example if I’m logged in, features like commenting on and liking videos should be available and work as expected. But if I’m not logged in the page should either hide these features or in this case what youtube actually does is it prompts you to. This is a smart way of getting people to register for their website, but either approach is fine because it either removes or changes the behavior given the user’s current logged in state.

And these are things that are evaluated as the page is loading. Some people don’t actually know this but web pages are traditionally written from top to bottom and also loaded by browsers from top to bottom. So for example in youtube’s case, it might load the header, load the video, load its title, and then while it’s loading the like buttons, it hits a crossroad. If the user is logged in it may load the functionality for liking a video, but if they’re not it may instead only load links to the login page.


Now of course as we just saw, in programming you can divide paths of functionality across the true and false evaluations of such propositions. For example an IF statement is a great way to get certain code only be executed if that condition evaluates true but maaaybe given some circumstance you may want to run something else in particular in the exact opposite case. This is all just logic stuff. And then of course when paired with one of the other common practices in code, iteration or looping, you can build some pretty powerful behavior.

Here’s an excerpt from something I’ve written, it’s a part of Ace Nickelback’s startup tasks where he builds and processes his vocabulary. If you don’t know, Ace Nickelback is a shitty discord bot turned twitter bot that I’m am 100% disapointed in.

Here all he does is, given a line of text, seperate that line into words and then updates his vocabulary with those words. As you can see I stupidly did not consider the case where the line would be empty and given this comment I left, someone must have submitted the Bee Movie script to him which caused this function to break. As a precaution I’ve added this condition which says if the line is empty, return, just stop.

If it gets passed that point, aka the line is not empty, it actually contains some text, then here’s some bullshit I don’t know what it does, but now HERE, here now is a loop. Basically what I wanna do is run the same code on every word in a sentence right? But this function needs to be able to handle sentences of different numbers of words right? So you’re not gonna sit here and hard-code one function for 1 word sentences, another for 2 word sentences, no no, that’s dumb.

So instead we re-run this loop for every word. In this loop, first we make sure once again that the word isn’t empty. That shouldn’t happen but I’m an idiot. IF our vocabulary already contains that word, we don’t want to add it again, right? That’d be redundant. We still do wanna do something, we wanna store that fact that the word appeared a second time. So instead of duplicating the word, we increase its count by calling another function I’ve written that assumably does its job.

ELSE though, and this ELSE let me remind you will only happen when the opposite of the IF happens, so in the case that the word we’re looping on is NOT already in the vocabulary. In this case we of course do add it to the vocabulary.

And that, ladies and gentlemen, is hopefully a half decent introduction to how propositional logic is used in programming to define conditions who’s evaluations trigger different intended behavior. A lot of people think of programming as a sort of straightforward linear scripting I think, but I hope this shows you that a lot of the time it’s more like slowly running through a sequence of events, evaluating our current state, and then writing in the behaviors that should happen when any decision to proceed differently is made. You’re typically not writing things that execute once, have one job and then complete. A lot of today’s systems are things that need to be always running.

Such as, excellent segue, gameplay systems! Like for example the hybrid real time turn-based action system of Final Fantasy 12. Now we have enough information to properly describe what’s going on here. So, turns we’re able to realize are just loops! Each player, friendly and foely has an ever repeating loop controlling their actions. The loop completes once every few seconds, but it’s what’s in that loop that’s most interesting.

In each action loop is list of gambits which are really just IF statements. Let me just say that again because that is a BIG deal, but this is a game that lets you write IF statements into your party members.

Lemme put that in gameplay terms. So like, a white mage you might wanna make your team’s dedicated healer capable of restoring people’s health as well as alleviate status conditions. In a normal game you’d have to issue those commands yourself but with this level of control you can write a set of instructions that handle this automatically for you. IF a partner’s health drops below a certain amount, heal them. IF a partner is inflicted with blindness, cast the spell that restores their vision. Then the way it works is that for each iteration aka turn, the bot will evaluate the current states of all partners and foes, stuff like health, statuses, other actions, etc, and then pick the best action to perform based on the gambits you’ve designed. You know, IF condition, do thing.

But it’s not exactly a state machine, plotting this out with a flow chart wouldn’t do it justice because what I wouldn’t be able to easily communicate that way is order or priority. State Machines are better for plotting switch/case models, evaluations of non-binary values, less determinate things. I won’t go into it but the idea here is that the order of the IFs here matters which is a way for you to prioritize actions over others. The way the loop works is it evaluates each of these conditions one at a time, but as soon as it hits one that’s true, it performs the associated action on the right, it doesn’t continue evaluating the cases below it. Kinda like how Ace Nickelback preemptively returns when people enter the Bee Movie script. So knowing that this isn’t a set of but rather a list, an ordered chain of conditions where one comes before and after another and that the first to evaluate to true triggers an action once per time boxed iteration, you can do things like set fallback behaviors to the back and put more important ones on top. If a partner needs to be healed, heal them first before trying to go cure anyone’s poison or blindness. If nothing’s going on just attack say the weakest enemy, but if an enemy is targeting our healer, attack them first. The order mattering lets you code in logic beyond just the conditions themselves, you see?

But then even greater than this, the fact that you still can at any point override gambits aka the automated action selection of a turn and have any character do whatever you want means you can write in high-priority conditions specifically to get triggered by yourself. For instance, one of my favorite set ups for tougher fights, I gave my black mage a condition for any enemies covered in oil to use a fire spell against them as this would do massive damage. Then in the middle of a fight that looks like its not going my way, I could commandeer the turn of any of my other characters who can use the oil spell to grease up the bad guys, knowing that as soon as this happens my black mage will stop whatever she’s thinking and blow fire up everyone’s asses. Fantastic. And so far I think I’m still in the early game, at the time of writing at least, so I can only assume how interesting things will get once I can perform a chain of 3 or even 4 gambits together across multiple characters to pull off massive automated offensive combos.


Now okay, so this is a great system and I’m gushing all over it but there’s gotta be a deeper meaning here right? I mean I wouldn’t go through the trouble of introducing so much dry comp-sci content for just that pay off right?

So having started the game one of the things I noticed about the UI built to handle the fancy cool gambit system was that it bore some similarities to a kind of thing you may have seen cropping up recently, Visual Programming Languages. Now technically these aren’t always languages, sometimes they’re just visual editors for programming that often boil down to glorified bracket coloring schemes, but the idea is that these things are used in a lot of programming education at highschool and even elementary school levels. They’re a good solution to the problem of programming syntax not always being easy to pick up. See for many people it might be easy to get into the mindset necessary to train to be a master coder, but actually transpiling raw ideas into letters and brackets and semicolons following different rules depending on the language you’re coding in, that’s a steep curve for many folks. These VPLs get by that by allowing users an accessible block-building type interface to create their programs. And of course as you could imagine, starting out programming is always much easier when there are clear goals set. So these VPLs lend themselves to gamification very effectively. The learning of working with logical structures and stuff like efficiency goes hand in hand gamey concepts like level completion and scoring systems, and it’s pretty dope a whole new generation of kids are learning computer science like this. It’s cool that they’re gamifying the process of learning how to make games. I just think that’s pretty cool.

I remember these things really gaining traction as I was starting uni so kinda a little late for me. When I was a kid we had similar type stuff for math but there’s only so much you can do game-wise with problems whose solutions are either objectively right or wrong, unlike programming. When I left my highschool there was no trace of computer science teaching going on at all, but I know from the few times I’ve visited and volunteered that now there is quite a bit  and I have to attribute a lot of that to the accessibility of these VPLs. And when I say accessibility I don’t mean just to students but to teachers as well. I mean it’s no secret that not every highschool teacher is an expert in what they’re teaching. Teachers are only experts at education itself, so unless they’re confident in they’re coverage of a topic it’s not something they’ll bother with. These sorts of visual programming games though, often developed by very credible orgs, empower teachers who might not have enough time to learn about programming in-depth to give their students tools and lesson material they can trust.

And I think this is wonderful and incredibly important because… for fuck’s sake the foundation of this stuff is actually not that hard and the earlier people learn, the better.

My first year of uni, my first lecture course ever, a class called mathematics for computer science, I sat in that class for half a year feeling like a grade schooler again. I’m in a jam packed class sitting there learning the basics of something that was not complicated at all, it was just stuff that nobody had ever formalized for us. I am not exaggerating when I say this but basic predicate and propositional logic is equivalent to counting with your fingers. You’re drawing 1’s and 0’s and solving little logic riddles and fucking drawing venn diagrams to solve problems, it’s baby shit my dudes. And one of the things I noted was that this is not something you could not teach at a high school or even a grade school level. Like, greater than and less than signs are more complicated than most of this. And going through this I kinda wished I’d learned it earlier in life, it would have been so useful to understand how logic could be formalized, like, not just for programming, just in everyday living. I wished someone really smart had sat down and developed a course for some instructor to give me in grade/highschool as opposed to, I don’t know, having 1 class a year called creative writing where you don’t actually learn any technique about anything you may as well just pick up as a fucking hobby if you like it, or fucking god 5 years of the same quebec history class but every year they teach it in a different chronological order like it’s fucking Pulp Fiction or something! “Oh shit dude, I get messed up in the timeline. I always forget, did the fur trade happen before or after they shoot the kid in the back of the car?”

Like, look, what I’m saying is that, fuck, you know that whole big binary tangent I went on before? Well turns out it's not a tangent cause here’s the callback: it’s kinda crazy to me that despite our proximity and dependance on software right now, that whole story isn’t general knowledge. I think software is important to understand at least a little because unlike some other applied maths and sciences, our in-depth use of it is unavoidable given our current lifestyles.

Like, the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the goddamn cell, right? And the joke is that this is something oddly specific that most people remember from school that they feel is useless in their daily lives when in reality, the more knowledge you can have about the world around you, the better, always. What I’m saying is that its upsetting that there’s no software equivalent joke like this. Because I think if there were, you know, some commonly known trait of computers and how they work, I don’t think it would be a joke or a meme. I think its utility would instead place it instead in the same category of mnemonics as something like fucking lefty-loosey righty-tighty.

I mean, I mean, this definitely doesn’t, like, escape the confines of, like, software developer meetings, but like, the closest thing I can think of to something like is like, you know, “reduce coupling, increase cohesion”, you know “you want low coupling, high cohesion”. That’s like, something I hear a lot, you hear people say that all the time. You practically chant it. But nobody else knows what that means, what the fuck?

Uh, so this is abrupt but I didn’t know how old this game was when I got it. I mean, I knew it was a remake but I really didn’t care, I was more interested it playing around with its gambit system. But then I played this one joke level where you’ve gotta run around town yelling at people and for some reason this was familiar to me but I couldn’t remember why. Until of course it hit me, this was the set up that Mega 64’s video, in which this dude runs around town yelling at people, was the punchline to.

And now whether or not I liked it now I knew exactly how old this game was, at least. I was really into Mega64 as a kid, I’m pretty sure one of the first pictures I ever got tagged in on freaking facebook, was, I was goofing around the halls with some friends wearing a Mega64 shirt. I loved their videos and they inspired me to start making my own but as it stands I look at those days as being far behind me. I’ve grown since then, I have degree and a career that I would have never expected to have back then. These photos are soon gonna be a decade old. Little did I know then or now, that this game I’m giving all this praise to today for introducing an innovative pseudo coding system for automated party member control in an rpg, this game spoofed by some internet comedians that I was wearing the shirt of, this game was already 4 years old when this photo was taken.

Forget the graphics, the story, forget that shit. If you just showed me the gambit system yesterday and said “hey when do you think this game came out” I’d have said “I don’t know, maybe 2012?”. And that’s what I was saying to myself for a while playing it, all until this one goofy level revealed its age to me. Given a point of reference in time for this game, remembering how old I was when I saw that video and how little I could have predicted about where I’ve eventually come in my life and how little anyone could have predicted about how technology and software in particular have evolved, pffffoo it’s incredibly impressive knowing that this game has always been just under my radar exposing players to such an awesome de-constructed view of its own systems that would one day have a future version of myself jaw dropped trying to explain this shit to a bunch of people over the internet come an hd re-release.

Fuck. Me. Games are sociotechnical systems and it’s sad to me that maybe the socio side of that equation wasn’t prepared to handle something like this at the time, but hey.


So for as impressive as Final Fantasy 12 is for reflecting almost perfectly a trend in computer science education close to a decade early and for exposing players to propositional logic, it still did this in a game. While programming, of course, is something fundamental on a certain level to games, typically it doesn’t find itself anywhere near the level on which player’s interact. Like we said it’s cool and all but it still had to work in the context of a game, so did it?

How about we take a look one last time at Medabots which is an example of a game I think handled customizable ai behavior in a game really well. The way they handled it here was by making it an unlockable. Just like how powerful weapons and robot parts would only be unlocked as the game progressed and the player proved they were of a skill deserving to wield them, ai partner behaviors would be uncovered as the player completed more and more battles. The game would start you off with simple weapons and basic selectable behavior for bots. But the better you got and the more battles you got under your belt, the more granular some of the commands you’d unlock would become. This was fair because when it comes to issuing commands to your ai partner, the more control a command gives you the more powerful it really is. So saving these for last left high-level strategies only available to you towards the end, again, just like weapons.


Gambits in Final Fantasy 12 are managed very similarly, though this is a Final Fantasy game so it’s hella more complicated. Gambits themselves being composed of different entities, a slot for the gambit to sit in, a condition for it to watch and evaluate, and an action for it to trigger, it only made sense to make each of these unlockable differently.

Gambit slots themselves are unlocked through character skill trees. This puts them of course on the same level of importance as everything else you unlock via skill trees. Things like health upgrades, abilities to wear and weird certain classes of armor and weapons, special abilities, etc. The fact that the game’s main character progression mechanism equates a single gambit slot all of these other things really sells you, as a player, their worth. I mean, something concrete like a new weapon class has a value that’s easy to understand, but a single new gambit slot holds so many possibilities. It can make the difference between being able to string together a list of actions or not, or alleviating your stress as the player by automating a healing task that takes enough time off your hands to manage your team better.

Now gambit actions, the commands that are given to your character automatically by gambits, those are unlocked for the gambits as soon as they’re they’re unlocked for the player. I mean, fair enough, this system’s supposed to be an extension of the players existing, not something different. The conditions though that trigger those actions, those are unlocked by purchasing them at gambit shops. Again just like weapons and gear and potions and everything else, gambits are sold to the player by specified merchants who deal in em. Just like you could go to a store and say “hey I wanna buy that cool knife”, you can walk into a store and say “hey I wanna buy the ability to listen to the event that an enemy or ally is in a particular state”.

For example you can buy the ability to listen to enemies that are disabled or silenced and then create high priority gambits with it for your characters where, when it's true, they attack that foe. Why would you do that? I don’t know, maybe sometimes when a battle is a little hectic you wanna prioritize all our efforts to remove one foe from the field. I can manually cast silence on them just to mark them and then watch all of my party members shift focus for a moment on that single enemy, take em out, and then return to their normal behavior. Or maybe I want to listen to the event where an enemy has a certain buff and then create a gambit for one of my mages where they cast dispel on that opponent to remove the buff. There’s a lot that can be done with this and it’s cool that it’s not all available at once but instead the game makes you buy these listeners.



What’s nuts is I get it, sometimes it tough to reconcile spending hard earned fantasy currency on invisible, intangible gambit components rather than weapons and armor. But then you use them in the field and you realize that often their value far surpasses anything, anything else you could buy. Often you’ll be in a battle and you’ll notice a certain pattern in your enemies and go “dang, I wish I had a certain gambit, that would really help me out here”. And so the next time you visit the store you remember to buy that gambit trigger in anticipation of it being useful again in the future. This game does easily what many other such rpgs struggle their worst to; it suggests that more important than any sword is a proper strategy that uses that sword.

And if that weren’t enough, and maybe something you might have gotten worried if you’re hearing all this for the first time, the gambit system isn’t a “one-size-fits-all” sorta fuckery.

You know most rpgs, a weapon is either objectively better or worse than other weapons. And elemental spells which might instead have a rock-paper-scissors trichotomy have installed cooldowns so they can’t be abused. There’s this idea that there are certain spells and weapons that, if you got em, you should be using them as soon as you can.
Gambits on the other hand aren’t like this. They neither abide by a one-size-fits-all or use-on-demand model. Gambits are more like something orbits around your preference, how you’d like to play. Gambits are a way for the player to formalize their playstyle, to write how they play into code and have their party execute on that playstyle. And of course, preferences and playstyles are something that change throughout a game, as time passes and new opportunities lends themselves to be taken advantage of.

Just like you can program with different goals in mind like time vs space efficiency or effectiveness or time to complete, you can build gambits for different purposes aside from the most efficient combat. For example, when I was running low on that in-game currency stopped for a minute and designed what I called the money making gambit setup. Here I’d have my nimble thief set to use his steal ability on any enemy at 100% health. Since enemies can only be stolen from a maximum of one time, this was a good way to ensure that he’d steal no more than necessary as a battle went on. As enemies would come into view he’d run off and steal from them, and as they’d inevitably take damage he’d no longer be interested in stealing from them because now enemy health equals 100% evaluates to false for each enemy. Then as backup I made a high priority gambit for my sharpshooter to use his poach ability on any enemies at critical health. His poach attack would, if it turns out to be their killing blow, reward me with an extra piece of loot. Together, these two gambits allowed me to automate the process of getting the most loot out of each enemy encounter without me having to stress a cell in my brain.

And that’s really powerful. I mean, I never liked thieves in rpgs because there’s something about asking me to pick a move on a turn that’ll have me always choosing to attack over stealing in the moment. When that stuff can be automated though, when you can remove the human element from the equation, you get better results and you still feel like you made the right decision as a player for planning ahead. It’s not anymore about performing a steal and getting an item during a turn but instead about writing the logic for an automatic and efficient stealing machine to operate by.

And as fucking cool as that is, I do have some unmet desires.

The game does more than enough by exposing any of the game’s internal logic, don’t get me wrong. But knowing that it exposes any makes me wish there were certain other things it did.

I wish for instance that you could write negations into the gambits. Like, if an enemy is not at critical health, attack them. That means if they are, don’t. Leave critically injured enemies to one my characters with a gambit that does target them and uses, say the poach ability to get the most out of them. It’d be great to be given this control to keep your party members from stepping on each other toes, it lets you design much more cohesive gambits.

I wish also that it went a step further and allowed you not only to control actions given states but trigger actions on the transitions between states. I wish you could control what your character does between, right before, and right after actions rather than have them just standing still and loop through their instructions. Right now I can’t write a list of gambits that would make my fighter whack a guy, run far away to heal themselves, and then run back in. Or maybe something neat like have allies stick close together if multiple enemies target them at once. Or just plain one that could make them circle an enemy between attacks. Any sort of control over movement between turns would have been phenomenal.

I also wish you could set multiple conditions per action evaluated with your typical logical operators like AND and OR. Or better yet, have a way to nest multiple gambits as sub gambits within a parent conditional. Like you know, IF an enemy is targeting me, IF their attack power is over 100, cast blind on them, ELSE IF their attack power is over 50 cast defense on myself, ELSE fallback to attack them. Shit like that would be fantastic. As is you can’t really get anything close to this.

And fuck me up you know what’s crazy? Enemies use gambits too. I wish there were abilities pertaining to enemy gambits. Like, special ways to reveal enemy gambits or modify enemy gambits. I wish there were ways like that to spoof the enemy and for the enemy to spoof you. For as much as they treat them like anything else in an rpg, there’s nothing close to buffs or debuffs on gambits. I wish you had to consider stuff like enemies straight hacking into your troops in designing your gambits. That’d be sick.

But here’s the thing though. All of these wishes depend on the thought that all of this underlying code is already there and they chose not to expose it via the gambit system. I might be wrong, I don’t know what it was like programming games 13 years ago so back then this may have been exactly how the ai was built, and so this may have been as much as could have been done. I just like to dream. I mean, none of this would’ve been impossible to include in an remaster/rerelease, just saying. Not that I think the effort required would’ve translated proportionally into sales, fuck I’m sorry I like to joke but deep down I’m a realist. Kill me.


I liked Final Fantasy 15 a lot and the seamlessness and noisiness of ai partners was really immersive and that’s good because that’s exactly what it was going for. But now I can’t help but imagine a more mechanically driven version of that game with it’s fluid combat system and an extended and enhanced version of the gambits from this game.

Final Fantasy 12 has been a fun game to look at for its implementation of a really unique accessible and, for the time, advanced programmable ai party system, which I keep saying but is partly incorrect cause that very descriptive title leaves out the fact that this is also gamified and treated just like any other property of your party. This is the only game I’ve made any sort of video on that’s impressed me on a technical level and touched me on a personal level so equally. This game exercises, I feel, parts of my mind I didn’t know I wished other games did. And it’s adoption of the methods for the sake of gameplay that are now being used in early computer science education gives me such fucking hope. Aaaaand that’s it. I think at this point I’ve wrapped up all the different narrative threads I’ve been knotting up throughout this video, and I think I did it all without mentioning Rube Goldberg even once. Fucking ha!

It’s like they say, you can’t program your nose but you can program your friends’ noses. Thanks for watching.


Hello and welcome to the endscreeeeen. It’s me, ya boi.


Before we get into the real beef here, boys and girls, lemme know if this sounds familiar at all to you?

You’re a kid, chillin’ at home, maybe with your siblings playing some videos games and goofing off and having a good time, and then your parents call out from upstairs “aaaaaaaye, get over here we’re gonna do something with the whole family!” and you’re like ooookay, so you shut down your stuff, wrap up your controllers, you go upstairs and what is it your parents want to do with you? Well of course, they wanna sit down for 1 and a half to 2 and a half hours in complete silence and watch a movie.

Family time huh? Is this, you know, watching literally whatever the heck movie you just found on netflix, is that really a better way for me to spend my time than continue to play super smash bros with my bro? And like, you know, be actually social and gain something from the experience? Of course it is, because games rot your brain, they wear out your eyes, they make you violent and aggressive, games are just silly childish immature dinky toys.

Except, no, not at all, none of that, you and I know better. Some people though, they don’t, to them I’m sure what I just said made perfect sense and was very agreeable. I’d be willing to bet though that at my time of writing this in early september of 2017, those folks would all in their 40’s and on. See that’s the issue, as sure as I am about that demographic, I’m sure that future generations won’t have this issue, this problem is nothing that time can’t fix and we as those enjoying our form of entertainment in it’s relative infancy are those unavoidably forced to suffer these consequences.

But is this problem just attributed to time? No. As I hope I explained well enough in my Perfect Dark video, games are sociotechnical systems, and so number value of the year has less of an effect on them than to society of the time. And is there nothing that can be done? No, I don’t think so. People’s conditioning towards certain beliefs just means it’s hard, not impossible, but hard.

So, everyone, today’s video is not for you, or, well maybe it is. What I mean is that this video isn’t written with my typical audience in mind, rather I’m thinking of your parents, my parents, the generation that raised us, the generation that literally doesn’t give half a crap about the thing that’s possibly one of the biggest deals in today’s youth culture. This video is addressed to Generation X and above, most importantly parents of young adults and children who don’t understand games.


In this video, I hope to undo the conditioning that was applied to you through the very narrow view your news stations provided and hopefully quickly legitimize games as a form of creative art and technical craft for you, also hopefully in the meantime getting you a little upset at those sources of the misinformation you’ve held for so long, then I’ll discuss the details and benefits of gaming as a hobby that I’m sure you’re unaware of in order to ease your mind about your children’s activities while also contrasting them against the sorts of hobbies that typical Gen Xers partake in, and finally I’ll give some advice both to parents and gamers about ways to improve both active and passive experiences.



So first, because often being a millennial discredits you immediately in conversations with true ‘grown-ups’, I’m gonna tell you a little bit about myself. I’ve noticed that in conversations with adults in my own family I’ve only really ever begun to be taken seriously when I started to gain credibility. Basically I was at the metaphorical conversational and sometimes literal ‘kids-table’ until I started University.

So hi, online I go by LambHoot but friends know me as Denis. I produce critiques on video games in a video format here on youtube. The work I’m most notable for online, much to my discouragement, are my four yearly produced, unironic in-depth looks at SpongeBob games. Believe it or not I’ve actually received serious flack for these but overall they’re not something I let define me, I’m a hobbyist when it comes to video making afterall. The videos of mine that I think are more important are those with a computer science, informatics or engineering twist. At the end of the winter of this year I completed a 4 year bachelor’s of engineering in software engineering and have been working in my field since. Oh shoot! What was that? Your ears just pop open? You listening now. Millennials are growing up guys, y’all time has passed, lots of us have degrees now and know our business. So while in my country I can’t yet legally call myself an Engineer because of how Canada regulates the use of the title sort of like medical doctors and lawyers, in your country I likely could call myself one. So hello, I hope I have your attention now, class is in session and LamB.EngHoot is ready to lecture, ya freaking cucumber.





So, let’s get straight to it. Games are not toys, they’re not bad for you, and there hasn’t been substantial evidence to prove that games make people violent. I say this to cover my butt because VR has been successfully used to treat PTSD and though nobody’s studied it yet, I’m kind of personally afraid about the impacts of depictions of violence in true VR and I think this should be regulated until actually studied. Just consider that my attempt at future proofing this video.

But we’re talking the sorts of games your kids are playing and have been playing up to 2017. Games with a controller in their grip or a keyboard at their fingertips and a screen in front of them.

Now, lets level, movies and television are something you understand. These are passive experiences that you observe for entertainment. You sit, look and listen, and that’s about it.

What makes games different is that they’re active, they require activity to extract entertainment from them. You play a game, there’s interaction and player agency involved. Here’s the kicker though, games can also be passive. Some people like to view art mediums as a sort of hierarchy with games at the top and writing at the bottom, but it’s less like that and more like a composite structure.

So movies are visual, this is what they extend from audio drama and music. Do films contain music though? Yes, absolutely. Video uses audio tracks to enhance the experience but also can showcase music alone, think of any movie that cuts to a black screen and just plays a track for a few moments to end a scene. Movies can contain music, and so all of the experiences you can have with music can thus be had through the medium of film as well. Obviously movies use audio constructively, but this still holds true.

So just like how movies add a visual element to music, what games do can be seen as adding an interactive component to films. Now, arguably this is a much steeper jump, making narratives interactive and observer controlled, much steeper than just adding visuals to music, but it’s similar in that a game can fulfill all of the same purposes as a film. For instance, in many games something called a cut-scene may be played, now remember this word, it’s gonna be important later. Cut-scenes are basically short videos in between sections of gameplay that help drive the story forward or present things that the player doesn’t really need agency over.

The Metal Gear Solid series is well known for its high quality and often lengthy cutscenes. In Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots, an uninterrupted sequence of 4 cutscenes plays for a total of 71 minutes towards the game’s conclusion, one of those cutscenes alone being 27 minutes long and currently holding the world record for the world’s longest cutscene in a game.

This section of the game is basically a film, but nevertheless extended through interaction. First of all, cutscenes are used to set the stakes, tone and atmosphere between parts where the player assumes control, giving context to their inputs. This long scene serves as payoff and conclusion to a series that’s spanned 4 main titles and starting in 1998 and finally ending in 2008, a decade later. Many young players grew up with and as these characters, so a lengthy form of closure was not unwelcome.

So setting your controller down for this part or any cutscene in any game for that matter allows you to have the same experience as a film. It’s a short movie playing on screen, it’s fully scored and there’s investment to be had in the events going on. Holding the controller though may allow you to interact with the game’s world during these sorts of things. From cutting to different perspectives, playing flashbacks or in some games making choices, the scene doesn’t just serve to enhance the game’s meaning, but itself can be enhanced by the game’s controllable interface, the controller. And we’re not even getting into the haptic feedback that controllers provide through sensitive and precise rumble. It’s crazy how desensitized gamers become to these things, but feeling the rumble of a helicopter ease in and out as it passes during a scene or gameplay is such an awesome thing.

Briefly, lets touch on music. Music is more interesting in games because it can appear in static sort of cutscenes but also during gameplay. Now, when a player is playing, all sorts of things can be happening that a developer can’t anticipate unlike during those scenes. So often you’ll see games implement some form of dynamic music both to ensure that the audio doesn’t get in the way of the game but also, you guessed it, to complement it.

Classic examples include games where transitioning from above ground to underwater causes the arrangement of the music playing to change, a great example of this can be found in Donkey Kong Country Tropical Freeze. That’s pretty neat huh? The music changes to better suit the change in gameplay.

Similarly, splatoon does this when hiding in ink. While outside of the ink, you’re able to engage enemies, but when hiding you’re evasion mode, so the music quiets down.

A more cinematic example can be found in one of my favorite games, FFXV, which not only uses a variety of different combat music tracks to highlight the types of enemies or times of day, but also may change the music depending on the players performance or progress throughout a fight. Towards the end of the game, the player and their party are attacked by this fire demon god dude, and throughout the beginning of the fight, a section of the track “Hellfire” is played which seems to express the power and might of this enemy, kind of telling the player “yo, this is one bad dude, you’re in his house, good luck taking him down”, basically serving as his theme. At one point during the battle though, the player gets an unexpected leg up in the fight, and from this point on the music takes a drastic shift into a heroic theme, the theme of the player, borrowing tunes familiar and identifiable from earlier parts in the game, basically telling you “yo, forget about this guy, you’re the hero, you just took his keys and now its your house, show him the freaking door”. If you listen to the track alone without the dynamics of the game influencing it, you can tell exactly at which point this happens. Basically the music on its own stands up, but was made specifically for this moment in the game and both benefit by collaborating on this experience.

So, let’s review for a second. Games can literally do everything movies can do and they can literally do everything music can do simply by incorporating them. They can also enhance themselves through their use and reinforce certain themes or playstyles and compliment experiences. Do you recognize movies, video and music as art? What about things I didn’t even bring up that’s a significant part of games, but acting, the performance arts, and drawing, design, sculpting, writing, do you recognize these as arts?

Well, then you have to recognize games for their ability to emulate and use them. Forget about the reasons crafting and designing human interaction on its own can be considered art, but just by composition you need to recognize the artistic elements that make up games.


Now, having covered older mediums, let’s look into the sorts of things that are only possible in games.

Now, at the beginning of this video, I told a little story about parents calling a kid up for a movie. This obviously came from my personal experience. One movie I recently watched in almost complete silence with my family was Fury, the WWII film with Brad Pit. Really good movie, gotta say. So I’m watching it and in one of the first scenes a tank gets blown up and a pretty gory thing shows up, a young man lit up in flames pulls out his handgun and kills himself to spare himself to pain. My dad at this point, broke the silence momentarily to unnecessarily take a jab at video games. He said something along the lines of “see that, that’s what war was like. It’s not like your war games, it was serious, it’s not a game”. It’s not like my war games, it’s serious. I didn’t have enough time or attention from anyone to respond to that, but it really got on my nerves. This isn’t the only time a similar comment had been made in my house about quote un quote War Games, and I know other people have had similar experiences.

But we know now that games aren’t just games, they’re art, that can have meaning. Games are an interactive medium, they can’t only have points but can express them better than passive experiences. We’ll get to that in a minute though.

For some reason *cough cough* the news and their misunderstanding of games, my parents and many of you Gen Xers watching this video have very poor opinions about games. Whenever games were in the news in the 90’s to 2000’s, it was almost always for negative reasons, making games seem to be constantly surrounded by controversy. Often times your opinions were influenced by people who didn’t even really know what they were talking about. You were taking stories as fact from people who didn’t even know the whole story.

The classic example is what happened to a game called Six Days in Fallujah. It’s crazy to me just listening to the aggressive tone of the news reports about the game that ultimately got it to lose support from its publisher and go unfinished and unreleased. The reason, unlike other “War Games”, this one was based on a real battle in Iraq. But’s not like it glorified war, in fact it was the opposite. The game was meant to be a realistic depiction of war, of what it’s like to be a Marine. Basically, the story is that this team of developers had been working closely with some marines as advisors on a military simulator game they were making. Then, all of the marines left to go actually fight in the battle of fallujah. When they came back, they told the game makers of their story and they started working on adapting this into a new game. It would have featured intense realism to the point that ethics were implemented. For example, if you shot a civilian, the game would be over. The game would have been very respectful, realistic, and honor the marines who fought in the battle and were consulting on the game. But because it was based on a real battle, holy crap could the media not handle it. Because games aren’t art, they can’t make a point, games are games, they’re meant to make a player have fun, they’re a toy, right? You can’t let people have fun in war. They could not understand that games had evolved since the early days of waka waka pacman. It’s ridiculous listening to these, the media was being outright disrespectful, not understanding the full story or even the medium they were criticizing.

It was no different than a film getting crap for depicting real events. Why are films allowed to? Why is Dunkurk allowed to exist? Saving Private Ryan? Blackhawk down? Enemy at the Gates? 
Your conditioning is probably pretty deep, but basically this is what I’m saying. This whole scandal was as ridiculous as it would have been if Dunkurk was hammered by the media for being based on real events. It’s freaking art, and it wasn’t disrespectful. I need you to understand and believe that because it’s true. No matter how hard it is for you to compare this real backlash and this hypothetical one, you need to put them on the same page. That’s how sily the news has historically been when reporting on games.


See, the thing is, games are NOT always about having fun. Toys, yeah. If they made a world-war II era gi joe with light in flames and commits suicide action, yeah that would be offensive because it’s just a product for kids to play with that doesn’t really say anything about war, but just like films can depict scenes of violence and be praised for it, games can too. I know it’s hard to understand, that’s why I’m repeating it multiple times, for your retention. Games are not always about having fun, just likes movies aren’t always all pure entertainment, some try to get yo thinking, think about it.

Basically, moral of the story, when the news talks games, don’t listen, whatever they report is very likely misinformed, wrong, and harmful for you to consume.

Oh wow you can run over people with your car and kill them in Grand Theft Auto. Parents, don’t buy this game for your kids! Guys, you know what I spent the majority of my time doing in Grand Theft Auto 5? I literally just bought a submarine and piloted it through the ocean because it was spooky and cool and it freaked me out and I loved it. GTA can be so much to so many people, it’s a crime movie parody, but it’s also an immersive simulator. You can do all sorts of things, the trick is to find what you like and do that. Runner up after using my sub was standing on delivery trucks and shooting cars because the AI enemies in the game didn’t know how to handle that tactic. Yeah, I’m shooting at people, but they’re not real. I’m playing with a game’s system, I’m trying to find points of weakness in a well built software and exploit them to see the hilarious and crazy over the top outcomes. Chill out.

You know what you probably heard about GTAV? You probably heard about all of the backlash it got for this one scene that involves torture. People were taken aback by the extremely realistic depictions of violence. You know what nobody probably told you though? The scene was actually a commentary about the unnecessary use of torture by government agencies, the character performing the torture is actually very much opposed to the idea of it, and it’s not like the game obfuscates this idea in any way, it literally spells it out for you in the sequence that happens immediately after. The cop dudes overlooking the torture you’re doing leave and straight up tell you to kill the guy. Instead, your character takes him into his car and drives him to the airport, during the ride, revealing his true intentions. He basically tells the guy to take a flight to some place very far away and tell his story, about how he was tortured over information he would have given up anyways had they just asked. GTAV, a game that you’ve probably only heard of in negative contexts, these are actual lines of dialogue from it:
“Torture’s for the torturer. You torture for the good times - we should all admit that. It’s useless as a means of getting information”. Of all the things to take a serious stance on, this is pretty mature of a game like this. Of course, as an adult nobody’s going to show you the truth because it doesn’t make for a sensational headline.


But that shows another issue adults seem to have with games. Looking at them as simple playthings disconnects them from those responsible. Yeah, you know what, you could easily argue back in the day that music could influence kids to do bad things. Yeah, any gang of drugged up punks can band together and start making tunes for kids to bang their heads to in agreement. The process of making games though is really tough, and triple A stuff isn’t the sort of thing anyone can do. Big games are made by professionals with many skills, they’re built as products made by businesses. Like I said, people go to school for years to learn how to make specific parts of games, but when your parents look at them, its as if they forget that people were responsible for it, as if it just came out of nowhere. The people who make games, the ones I grew up with at least, were people from your generation. The people who run large game companies are also people from your generation. These are trained professionals working on a project. Adults make games. Even games specifically for kids require smart people work on them. You have no idea how many different people from different backgrounds and disciplines work on games, and the crews have only gotten more and more diverse as games have evolved. But genXers not involved in games or tech have this really weird way of looking at games, this totally unappreciative and unimpressed way, the only thing I can really compare it to is like when you try to make your pet watch tv. They, they just can’t, they don’t have the capacity to understand, though in the case of parents, it’s a mixture of choice and conditioning, but anyways. It’s just kind of spooky that the work of hundreds of skilled people can be totally ignored and disregarded like that.

So anyways back to that movie where the dude catches fire and shoots himself. Yeah, he caught fire and shot himself. The message: war is bad. You know how well that’ll stick with me? So well that I literally had to look up what exactly happened. I couldn’t even remember what it was, I thought he just caught fire and died, totally forgot the suicide part until writing this video. And that’s the problem with passive mediums. Sure, the art can have a message, but the observer needs to understand it and be willing to believe it. I clearly didn’t, because it was just a movie and I forgot 2 days after.

Now, let's look at the same message, but expressed in a game, an active medium. I’m going to refer again to Metal Gear Solid because I think overwhelming you with games is a bad idea, so let’s stick with this. But just for reference, even games like Call of Duty, the most action packed “war games” don’t glorify war.

Anyways, so Metal Gear Solid is known lovingly by its fans under the alternate title, “War is Bad” 1, 2, 3, 4, Peace Walker, and 5. Believe it not, the games actively discourage violence at every possible point. Basically, each game is pretty long and your final score is only tallied up at the end. It’s almost like negative grading, so you start the game off with a 100%, but every time you do something wrong, either getting spotted or killing a person, your score and final rank are deducted from. This is a game where you have tons of guns and ammo and ways to kill people, just like war, but killing people makes you lose points. The reinforces more peaceful and skillful playstyles, staying hidden and away from the enemy as not to need to kill them, knock them out or tranquilize them rather than killing them. Even during parts of the game, the players actions on the battlefield may be judged by other characters, reprimanding you for committing murder. In metal gear solid 4, you’ll lose control of your character as he begins vomiting if you kill too many people. Playing through the entire game without killing anyone or being spotted even once will give the player special items for their next playthroughs. Yes, there are guns, yes there are tanks, but this is not a “War Game”, this is a piece of art with a message, this is in fact an “anti-war game”.

Metal Gear Solid 3 hammers this home better than I think any other game in the series. You know how in movies there are like masterpiece scenes that everyone knows about? Yeah, well games, evolving maturing and growing right under your nose, yeah they have these too, and this one part in this game is probably one of those. It’s is clear and to the point about its anti-war theme, actively punishing violent murderous players more than a simple dock to their overall score at the end.

At one point in the game, your character basically dies and wakes up in this knee-high river surrounded by burning trees and haunted by a ghost. You’re instructed to walk down this river, and as you do, something bone chilling happens. Ghosts of dead soldiers begin to walk past you, and as you have taken life from them, they take life from you as you pass. Now, one could assume that this is just a scripted scenario or level, that it’s been designed this way, but in fact the player has designed this challenge for themselves. These ghosts aren’t random or scripted, each and every single dead soldier is one that you’ve killed, sporting a wound wherever it was you struck a killing blow on them. The entire time you’ve been playing, the game has been recording your murders, not just the number of them, but the kinds. It’s a shocking way to show the player just how evil they’ve been. War is Bad, look, here are all of the men you’ve killed. It’s not just a game where you kill them and they go away. Their bodies stay where you left them, evidence of your crimes, and their ghosts haunt you until they have a chance to take your life.

There’s a pretty weird puzzle to this part, basically you can’t complete it until you figure it out, and it involves letting your character die, meaning that many players will be forced to redo this part over and over again until they figure out what they need to do.

I forgot about that moment in Fury within a week’s time, but I will never forget the river of the Sorrow scene from Metal Gear Solid 3, and neither will anyone who’s ever played it.

Furthermore, despite always being given the option throughout the game to spare people’s lives, there’s one person that you can’t complete the game without killing. She’s your character’s mentor, and let yourself be fooled, though you ultimately kill her, she lays down here life in sacrifice to you and her country. The plots complicated, I won’t get into it. But when I say you kill her, I mean, you kill her. As the player, you’re never once forced to pull a trigger of a lethal weapon in gameplay, you can alway shooting to kill. In this scene though, a cutscene, she gives her gun to the character, tells him to kill her, he stands, holds the gun, and then the letterbox encapsulating the screen fades away, indicating that you’re in gameplay now. The scene does not end until you, the player, pull the trigger on the controller and kill her. You can sit and wait as long as you want, the game will not end until it forces you to commit a murder. War is bad. Yes, you can make the decision to be a pacifist, but sometimes war leaves you now choice. Free will doesn’t always have meaning in war, sometimes you just have to do bad things, and you can’t blame soldiers for their actions all the time because they weren’t always in control.

That’s the full message of the game, a message that only works because for the majority of it it tricked you into thinking it was just “War is Bad”, only appending the rest of it after the final and only mandatory discharge of a bullet.

Games can take any theme or idea or point that a film can express, and they can do it better. The player doesn’t need to be willing to believe it, the game can show them why, the game can show them what it’s talking about, make them experience what it wants.

So yes, sure, the movie was serious, but I’ve played games that were more serious. Your kids have been taught very mature things by games right out of your sight, without your knowledge. They’ve been experience masterclass presentations in this medium without your knowledge.

Imagine if you just found out randomly one day that your kid had been watching a bunch of classic movies and is now like a film connoisseur. You’d be impressed and proud huh? Why don’t you go look now through their games library then, look up reviews and analysis videos about the games they’ve played, because you probably have a lot to be impressed about. You’re kids are probably very knowledgeable about this thing that you just need to express more than 0 interest in.

Because again, seeing games as toys, seeing them as simple pastimes, if you hold that view, yeah, it makes sense to just throw them at your kids to occupy them and then get mad at them when they spend too much time in their games. As we’ve seen though, this is not the case. But you can see how harmful this can become in a parent child relationship.

Imagine being really really interested in something, having this really cool and fun and rewarding hobby, and then literally nobody caring about it, not even your parents. Parents not taking half a second of their time to take games seriously, I’d put that on the same level as missing a recital or a soccer game. This is a part of your kids life, and not even being able to have a conversation about it, well, then you can’t blame a kid for feeling like nobody knows them. Basically, if your kid played piano or was on a soccer team, you’d talk to them and listen to them talk to you about soccer. This establishes a good relationship. So, if your kid games, talk to them about it, you’ll learn a lot.

Now at this point I could talk to you about all of the benefits studies have shown that games have on people’s behavior, on how developing children who play games regularly score higher in school, how gamers tend to exhibit leadership qualities, how they have well honed vision and reflexes, how games can be used as therapy and treatment, I could talk about all sorts of things like this, but there are two problems with that:

1) now that I’m no longer in school I’ve lost access to Google Scholar so RIP
And 2), all of these are true things that you can either decide to look into yourself or just take my word for.

Instead, I want to spend my time here talking about something that none of the abstracts my limited access to google scholar was able to show me were talking about. Being a gamer myself, interacting with my fans and audience members and fellow video creator friends as often as I do, I’ve made a really interesting observation that I freaking wish soooo hard I could pull some numbers out to back up. Sadly I can’t, but listen, I would not bring this up unless I wholeheartedly believed it to be true.

I believe that games, more than any other hobby or form of entertainment serve as a gateway to other creative, technical, personally enriching and skill intensive hobbies as well as good social circles. And I believe that the cause of this is the aforementioned activeness of games.

I think there’s a fundamental difference between things you consume and do. Games are the only form of entertainment that you can’t really appreciate properly any other way but by doing. Just like anything else people do, we’re vocal about our interests and disinterests. If you take public transit and the system is crap, you’ll complain about it because this isn’t something you just sit and watch, this is something you need to do. If you’re playing a game and something doesn’t work, you’re not able to do something you want to do, you’ll get vocal about it.

Games have always been social experiences, and I think what it is I’m trying to talk about is basically that classic example or that memory of me and my brother playing super smash brothers all day, talking about all sorts of things, really bonding, more so than just sitting and watching a movie would allow us to. I think it’s that basic experience but taken to its logical extreme through today’s society and technology.

The ratio of gamers who are involved in other interesting activities as a result of games, though unmeasured, is pretty much inarguably greater than that of any other form of entertainment. Lots of people listen to music, basically everyone does, but how many people have been inspired solely by music to pursue some other art, make their own music? Certainly a good number, just not a very good ratio. 


The thing about gamers is that there’s almost always something else they do. Either they cosplay, which is to build costumes, or they produce art about their favorite games, or they write fanfictions. Yeah, some of these might seem cringe worthy and weird, but these are legitimate arts that kids are getting into because of games.

In my case, it was filmmaking. I already had an interest as a young highschool boi in movies, and with my first video camera in hand, I start spewing all sorts of crap onto youtube. I mostly mimicked what other people were doing, making lip sync videos to music and stuff. It was a game though, Resident Evil 4, that made me start to take video making, a seemingly unrelated hobby, more seriously.

Watching a cutscene from the game, I thought huuuh, how cool would it be if I reenacted this scene? I could even keep the original audio so I don’t sound like a whiny kid. It’d be so cool! And that’s exactly what I did. In the summer of 2009, I made and uploaded a video simply titled Resident Evil 4, in which I played the roles of both characters in one of the introductory scenes of the game. And despite being very new to video editing, the little skill I had acquired learning how to sync up to music videos was enough to get me going.

I continued working on videos, I started trying to make more visual gags, build more elaborate costumes, come up with my own practical effects to make these scenes in which I played everyone more believable, entertaining and funny. This eventually got me to a point where I wanted to make things that I just couldn’t in the crappy windows movie maker I had for free, so I got a better video editor and started experimenting with special effects. At this point I was also reenacting scenes from games other than Resident Evil like Metal Gear Solid, I had friends who were interested, so I had a cast and crew, and I was also working part time which meant my videos had a budget.

I still did the solo stuff, but now I had the ability to display multiple instances of myself on the screen at once. This video, fun fact, you can’t tell but I made it while recovering from butt surgery. The whole time I was filming here, I had a vacuum pack attached to my butt, it was great.

Every video I made I learned something new, I tried something new, sometimes I would spend hundreds of dollars on costumes and gear for videos that to this day have little over a few thousand views. This one in particular, I’ve run through the cost of before but off the top of my head must have been at least $300 Canadian dollars, and I was making a minimum wage of 10 and hour at the time. But I really really loved these games, I wanted to pay homage to them, I thought what I was doing was really cool and I really enjoyed it. My friends and I even got together once and made a video from our own original idea, it was a remake of a video they had made without me years ago that I wanted to try my hand at, and it was so much fun to write, to make, and it turned out exactly how I wanted.

NARS Episode 1 [REBOOT] currently sits just over 200 views with 3 comments, and I don’t care because at the time it was probably my proudest work.


It was very much inspired by the style of the cutscenes I had been using as templates for videos. Mimicking now not only acting and dialogue, my friends and I were actually able to reproduce exact shots. Copying these scenes taught me a lot about filmmaking and made the videos seem to be of a higher quality than they actually were. Half the videos work was already done for us, it was entirely mapped out and framed, we just had to implement it as best we could.

Now at the time, I was about to make a pretty big leap. And I’m not talking about the time I made a white screen outside of my garage door in order to reenact a scene where I needed to sky dive. No, the leap I was making had to do with school. It was about time to apply to university. I was conflicted between a couple of choices, I didn’t really know what to do. Just like when I started making videos as a kid, I thought I should just copy what other people had done, like some relatives who had done mechanical engineering. Though, again, just like on youtube, games came into my mind, and I at some point had a thought along the lines of ‘hey, why not try to make games?’, and just like that one game, resident evil 4, got me into this whole video making hobby I previously knew nothing about, games again were responsible for my decision to choose software engineering over mechanical. Also much like those cutscene reenactments, I grew out of the idea of wanting to make games, but it still inspired me to go into a discipline I turned out to really enjoy and appreciate as well as make great friends that I wouldn’t have otherwise.

Getting reinspired later on over a week spent studying for finals and binge watching the Angry Video Game Nerd on youtube was what brought be back to video making in a whole new format that likely you know me for today. If I hadn’t already had this base skill level at editing and producing videos that I got from the old scenes I did as a kid, this probably would have been too much for me, but because I had it, it was much easier for me to get started.

Games were responsible for, at least probably at this point in my life, the 3 most important things I’ve done, the three things that I think are most important when it comes to characterizing me. 1) learning the ins and outs of video making as a kid, 2) starting and completing a bachelors of engineering, and 3) getting into games critique.

The reason I think this is, again, is due to the activeness of games. Being something you do rather than observe makes every game you play sort of like a part of you, a small or significant part of your identity. The games you play say a lot about you, they’re really just what you do. I think that’s what drives kids to get into other hobbies either related to or because of games.

Because my story right there is not at all the only one like it. In fact I the day I walked into my first games focused class, I knew immediately that everyone in there had a story like that. These are people who have chosen to study something extremely valuable in today’s world, and they did so because of games. Some people come to it from other angles, because games afterall are multidisciplinary projects. Some people want to be artists on games, some people want to design levels, some people want to build technology for them, direct them, market them, produce them. Getting into games necessitates you picking up at least one technical or artistic skill, and the easily accessible game development tools available today make it very easy for kids to pick up these things and start learning and working. To these sorts of people, playing games is almost like studying them, their brains are firing on all cylinders while they play, thinking about everything they’re doing and coming up with ideas. What were you doing in highschool? Were you learning c# or javascript programming because you wanted to make games? Pfft yeah sure. I mean I wasn’t. But I know kids these days, I have fans who’ve been working on personal game projects at the age that I was goofing off with a video camera. If that led to a career in engineering, what the heck are the dudes gonna be doing?

And it’s not just making games that interests people, talking about games is a major source of work for lots people, it’s a hobby that a lot of people take extremely seriously, some turning it even into careers. Basically everyone I’ve met on youtube has, again a story very similar to mine. They got into video editing, they got inspired by games to talk about games, badabing badaboom. I honestly think that games have the highest proportion of critics to normal consumers of any medium out there. Everyone judges movies and music, but the amount of people who take to the internet to express their opinions about and analyze games is astonishing.

Not to alienate my genX audience, but we’re at a point where people discuss us on forums and threads without our knowledge even, there are internal memes about us, like the whole thing about how so many of our videos are titled ‘the importance of dadada’, and there’s that bingo chart too, I love this stuff. There’s a legitimately recognized community of independent game critics and hobbyists. This is insanity! What other entertainment related subculture has this?

And forget about just hobbies external entirely to gaming, but some gamers take gaming itself to the next stage. Many people participate in tournaments, some at the professional level, others are professional speedrunners, people who attempt to complete games as quickly as possible, sometimes at large events were tons of money is raised. I know I have some fans who organize speedrunning races from time to time where they individually stream the same game starting at the same time to see who can beat it first. These people know everything there is to know about the games, hot to exploit every system in order to complete them as quickly as possible. It’s super entertaining to watch and listen to them as they explain everything they’re doing. I think my favorite run I’ve ever watched is these two dudes running goldeneye 007 using this weird control scheme that uses both controllers, one dude controlling the legs and the other aiming the gun. It’s crazy to see the outcome of so much collaborative training.

When you factor in arts, hobbies, game criticism and studies, professional gaming, though I can’t find numbers on it, from my observations I’d be willing to say that somewhere easily around 50% of gamers have been inspired by games to pursue something interesting either as an extension of their gaming or separate to it, whether it be a creative hobby or technical skill.

Which is funny. I mean, my parents were interested in the videos I was making as a kid, and now that I do games criticism they don’t really care anymore. Back then though, even though I was literally reenacting scenes from games, they weren’t able to put 2 and 2 together. I mean, hmmm, we’re proud of the video making, but we’re upset about all of the game playing. Yeah but the game playing is what inspired the video making. I wouldn’t do the things I do weren’t it for games. Like I said, me finally getting a seat at the grown-ups table was entirely related to my academics, which again, entirely inspired by games.

When you’re a parent, you can’t pick and choose to only be proud of the consequences of some of the things your kids do. If they’ve chosen to pick up a really interesting skill BECAUSE of games, first of all you need to learn how to identify that, and secondly, you need to then get off their case when they play. Clearly it helps, it’s causing them to dream and make moves towards making them a reality. Like, how hard is that to understand. Think about it, please.



Now, here’s where I may get accused of being a little unnecessarily offensive. Basically, what I want to do, now that I’ve explained to you how rich of a culture there is around games and how large of a hobby space really exists around it, I want to compare gaming, arguably the most popular activity among millennials and the coming generations, against the main hobby of those, aka you, in generation X. That hobby is television watching.

While it can be argued that gaming is addictive, and yeah, I mean one of the goals in designing gameplay is to place a player in state of flow which can be very appealing, at least, as we’ve seen, games and very enriching. Many gamers are influenced by them to do other constructive things with their lives, again, I attribute this to the activity involved in games.

How many people do you know, and I mean, maybe you’re one of them, but how many people do you know who’s entire lives have becomes this cycle: Go to work, come home, watch tv, go to bed, rinse and repeat, exceptions thrown for short vacations every year and possibly house work on the weekends.

Does watching television help you in any way in your life? Does anybody ever wish they’d spent more time watching tv in their life? Do you even remember half of the shows you watch a year later? Do you talk about them with anyone during or after watching them? Do they really have any effect on your life, or honestly, could you have spent your time better doing something else?

For as unconstructive as it is, I really don’t understand how so many people basically have this one single hobby, watching TV. I get that it’s an addiction and a problem for many people, but it’s not a dependency, all you have to do is find something better to do. Unlike games which for many people we’ve discussed by this point are literally the best thing to do, unless you’re involved professionally in television, there’s not really a reason to waste away and watch episode after episode of some junk. I mean, from the perspective of a child, it's really discouraging to watch this happen to your parents, just growing old in front of a screen. I really don’t want this to sound like I’m insulting anyone, it’s just that I legitimately get anxious thinking about this. There’s just not much you can do.

I’ve talked to a lot of friends about this. I bring it up as a question, “what do you do with your parents?” and typically after long bouts of hmmmmmms and ummmmmmms, I normally get a  “well, we watch tv and movies”. The second question: “what do your parents do without you, on their own?”, and again, “watch tv and movies”. The amount of people people who have to think for a while about how little they do with their parents really upsets me. So many people don’t even know what they do together. This disconnect between us, I think is mostly to blame the differences in our hobbies for. Kids and parents these days do very different and incompatible things, and as a result, they drift apart. Or, better, as we’ve discussed, kids and young adults explore a variety of different interests while they’re parents stick around doing the same thing day in day out.

I think I stopped watching tv mostly as a result of that show big brother. I’d watch every season religiously. They’d tend to do this thing where they’d bring people back from previous seasons to the show, and one time they brought a dude that I really legitimately had no recollection of, even though I had watched his season. At that point I realized that all of that time spent watching this was wasted, I couldn’t even remember it, it was like shaving hours upon hours off my lifetime. It was a really strange moment, but it was a driving factor in my decision to no longer watch tv, an activity so detrimental and wasteful it was comparable to just turning my brain off temporarily. What’s the point if it doesn’t matter?

Now yeah, there are much healthier ways to watch television, not everyone has this problem, but when you actually consider TV family time, that’s bad. TV is not family time, there are ways to make it interesting and fun, and I’ll talk about that towards the end, but on it’s own TV is not a good way to spend your time, it causes you to miss out on things, and I promise, that as little as I regret every hour I’ve invested in gaming, there will come a day where you’ll realize how much of a waste this habit has been, how much time you’ve lost literally doing nothing, and you’ll be so devastated that you let this happen to you, that you let time slip away, time that you can’t get back.

Basically, I don’t regret gaming because it taught me how to make videos and how to program freaking web apps. You’ll regret tv because it taught you nothing you remembered and you missed out on things you wont get a second chance at.


And here’s why this matters. From the perspective of someone who knows better, someone surrounded by people who’ve personally improved themselves because of games, that example of being called up to watch a movie, it sucks even more. Not only could you be doing something better, but ultimately this time will be wasted, it likely won’t have any impact on you or your relationship with the members of your family, unlike a round of super smash with your brother or any other game you can imagine which actually does. It won’t prompt you to think about things as deeply.

Its especially discouraging when addiction to such a passive and uninteractive and antisocial, yes, unlike games which are absolutely social, it’s discouraging when something like tv gets in the way of actual family time and bonding.

I mean, nobody in my family really knows about the scale or scope of the videos I make online. I partially attribute that to a lack of accessibility, my dad one time asked me when I was going to go back and make a real video instead of another “talking video”, so there’s definitely that. Though, for all the time wasted watching literally nothing, I’d argue that it’s more valuable than that but HEY! Who am I to know anything. But this is what I’m talking about, I have an audience online at this point of about 4000 members strong. It’s not much, but it’s comfy. I get to talk to everyone. I have a discord server where people gather, I’m always getting tweets. People send me fan art, they make memes out of me, some people have entire folders on their computers filled with cropped out images of my face to make it easier to paste them on things and make jokes about me. I’ve had enough of an impact on a handful of people for them to make the decision to buy shirts online that I designed, most of them mocking myself, but still. These, I think, are really interesting things. I don’t really know anyone else in my non-online circle of friends going through these sorts of experiences right now. It’s crazy, it’s wild, but it’s fun, and as long as I keep it fun it’s good. And it’s just, I don’t know, I find it weird that so many strangers around the world genuinely care about me and have really shown support for me while my own family doesn’t even know what I do or have taken the time to try to understand. My dad will sometimes ask “so you make any new videos lately?” and I’ll be like yeah, I made three, and he’ll be like oooh cool, and then not ask about them and continue watching literally whatever the heck is on tv that I guarantee won’t even be persisted as a memory tomorrow.

I’m not crazy, right? I’m not whining, am I? That is kind of weird, no? If it were anything else I was doing, I’d expect a little bit of recognition I guess. So why not this? Though on a lighter note it’s tough to get motivated sometimes and guys really help me out with that, so, thanks.

And I think that’s where I’m coming from with this video. Having this sort of issue in my personal life, feeling the need to constantly validate video games and getting put down by people who won’t even put in the minimal amount of effort into their thoughts about it, it sucks, and I know I’m not alone. I also know there are some people who’ve never had this issue, whenever I hear about people who’s parents played games with them as kids, who introduced them to their favorite games, who got into series together, I get kind of jealous, and I feel really bad for anyone else struggling with issues like this. I know you can feel helpless in these sorts of situations, you’re young so your parents don’t listen to you and it’s hard to find people speaking your language to be your voice, people who adults consider worth their time listening to.

That’s kind of what I hope this video to be, something you can use to validate yourself and maybe make life much better for you and your family. This is the sort of thing I wish I could go back in time and tell my family back in the 2000’s when I was growing up, because this isn’t right.

I think it’s time for generation X, for grown ups, to grow up. Guys, get your act together. You’re wasting your time and hollering at your kids for not wasting theirs with you. A saying you guys like to say a lot, especially when it comes to taking bad influence from people at school is “well if your friend jumps off the bridge, would you follow”. Here’s what I’m saying, you’re jumping off the bridge, whether you realize it or not, and your kids, who you should be proud of, right under your nose, without your supervision or help, they’re trying so hard not to follow you. Get your act together before it's too late.




So, to shut this topic down, lets go over a few things you can do to change and make life much better, addressing the parents now obviously. I’d put understanding gaming and gaming culture first here but I hope that after watching this video you’re on the way to doing that, so forget it.

First thing’s first, talk to your freaking kids about their freaking games. Gamers literally always want to tell you about whatever game they’re currently playing. If your kids consume other entertainment related to games, like reviews, watch or read them with your kids, care about what they’re doing, it’s part of who they are so you have to put some effort into caring, otherwise they’ll think you don’t care, and honestly they wouldn’t be wrong. But every gamer is different, so don’t assume you’re kid is just some sort of essential ‘gamer’ because that doesn’t exist. Don’t just hit up the gamestop or gamebuzz or whatever and pick them out whatever generic “gamer” merch you see. It’s important to find out about the sorts of games your kid plays because it’ll say a lot about who they are. Maybe recommend a game based on their preferences, that would really impress them.

As a kid, I just kind of played whatever games my brother played, I didn’t really have an opportunity to look into what I wanted, what I found interesting. My access to the internet was limited at the time, so I didn’t even know about what sorts of games existed. I wish someone was looking out for me and trying to find games that they thought I would like rather than just getting games I specifically showed interest in.

In uni I first got my hands on an old copy of dark souls, a game that came out while I was in highschool. I so so wish I had known about it back then back when I had more time to commit to gaming because it really would have been a great experience for me. I literally didn’t even know this was a thing though because nobody in my circle of friends knew about it and I had nobody to show me the ins and outs of games. And now, the game is just kind of too large is scope for me to play with all of these new responsibilities I have. I missed out on Dark Souls. I get the jist of it, but I don’t think I’ll ever have the chance to finish it.

Obviously, also make an effort to participate in games with your kids. If you can, play with them, take turns doing levels. Yes, gaming does have an accessibility issue, meaning if you’re not very literate in games you’ll have trouble working them. Even if you can figure them out, it might take a while to develop the dexterity to fulfil the demands games make of you. But you don’t have to actually play yourself, just participate by watching your kid and talking to them while they play, commenting on what they’re doing, you’re participating in the game with them. There are plenty of ways to enjoy games with your kids that don’t involve you actually fumbling around with an unfamiliar controller, but if your kids asks you to, freaking do it! And don’t get frustrated and give up, make an effort. The worst is when a parent agrees to play a game and then gives up immediately.

Play sessions of some story rich games can appropriately replace family movie nights and really get people working together to solve problems, bonding the whole time. I mean, movies can be enjoyed properly together, so maybe don’t replace that entirely, but any instance of typical channel surfing or just watching literally whatever the heck is on tv, that can be replaced by chilling with your kids as they play a game. I mean, what do you gain from watching things you don’t care about? Nothing. What do you gain from being with your kids? You get to learn about their interests and make it known to them that you do.

If you want a recommendation, Metal Gear Solid is a good series I think for adults to observe others play. It’s as close to a movie as you can get without being one and it’s full of great examples of what games can be, that’s why I’ve tried to use it in a lot of examples in this video, also as a way not to overload you with tons of titles. If you want to play it, you can actually get the whole series running now on an old PS3. There’s a collection called the Legacy Edition which includes physical discs for all of the main series games with the exception of the first which comes as a code to download it online. I played through the first game with my sister this past year and I feel like it succeeded at being a great introduction to modern games. She’d never really played a full game before, but since she’s completed Resident Evil 4, started Resi 5 as well as MGS2.

If your kids begin to explore other interests related to games, support them and keep up to date with it. Again, if your kid was on the soccer team, you’d know exactly when their games are and how they’re doing. If your kids makes videos about games and has a fun audience, it should be embarrassing for you not to even know that. It’s your responsibility to try. And don’t blame your kids not for falling into crappy habits, just because the things they do aren’t things you care enough to understand, doesn’t mean it’s harmful. Maybe you’re behavior in life is harmful and they’re doing good by avoiding it.


Now, some people just don’t care, they still just want to veg out every night to tv. Great. Passive experiences are hard to have in groups and overall don’t benefit you if you’re not going to do anything with them. So, my advice to kids having trouble connecting with their parents, find ways to turn passive experiences into active ones. Do your parents drive to work everyday? Make them a mixtape for the car. You can show them what your musical tastes are and it gives you something to talk about. Maybe if you’re lucky they’ll introduce you to some music, you know, like people do when they interact socially. I have a pretty good approach for movies, feel free to steal it. Basically over the past year I’ve refrained from getting anyone any normal gifts for any occasion, like, no typical inanimate objects, and I’ve focused instead on trying to get people experiences, like groupons and whatever, you know, getting them out to do things. One thing I came up with was getting everyone bad movies as gifts and organizing time to watch them. The idea is that when your parents sit down to watch a movie, they typically want silence so they can enjoy it. When you frame a movie night as an opportunity to mock a film though, you’ve created an active form of entertainment, the goal of which is to extract as much fun out of the movie and everyone around. Laughing, cracking jokes, yelling and screaming, crying even, these are all things that you can do together when it’s established from the beginning that nobody actually wants to try and enjoy the raw contents of the movie, they want to enjoy each other's company.

I came up with this idea after my experience being one of few people in the world to own a copy of the notoriously awful film, birdemic, on blue ray no less. Everyone knows about this movie and they’re all curious to see it, so as someone who has it, I kind of served a few times as the bearer of the experience. I’m unfortunately the unlucky soul that needs to watch it every single time, but it’s fun introducing new people to it who want to see it, and it’s always a different experience, and it’s absolutely active and social. You establish bonds with people by watching a crappy movie like that together.

With my family it mostly worked, I don’t think anyone caught on to what I was trying to do but we had good times. So if you think that sounds interesting try it. And if you can come up with any other ways to turn passive observation of media into active events, please, feel free to share them with everyone in the comments below.





Aaaaaand that’s about all I have to say. Kind of a lot, huh? I mean, there was a lot to go over but there’s still more to this conversation. It’s up to you now to do what you want with these ideas, take a moment to reflect, and maybe figure out the best ways to enjoy yourself.

This video is not really good, it’s as good as I wanted it to be.

Ah, you know, it’s like they say, “the years keep coming and they don’t stop coming”, and here’s come and gone yet another year, this one, the two thousand and eighteen for any of y’all keeping count, and uh, I don’t know I guess a few good games came out? Lets uh, let's take a look at the best ones.

[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “These are the top 8 games of 2018”

[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 8, Hollow Knight.”

Hollow Knight didn’t technically come out this year, but this is the year I played it so shut up. Uh, it’s pretty good, if uh, if you can get passed all the… the bugs [wheeze]. I don’t actually really like or dislike metroidvanias, like, none has ever really left a major impression on me. I don’t know. But this one is cool cause, check this, you can let yourself die, then come back to where you died, and then you can use your ghost as a platform to go somewhere higher. That’s pretty cool, not that, like, I ever did this at all, but it was nice to know you could. Uh, otherwise yeah it’s just pretty good I guess.

[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 7, Spider-Man.”

Spiderman, spiderman, does whatever a spiderman can. This isn’t by far the only game that’s come out this year with a photo mode, it’s been a really weird trend recently that I haven’t understood. That is until now because this is the first game that made me care about. Like, I guess there’s something to be said about the quantity and quality of a game’s content when it drives players to wanna take pictures of it. The game is really good, and uh, it’d definitely make it way up higher on the list if it weren’t for one major game breaking issue. So in the game sometimes there are points of interest that you need to activate with a press of a button, and as you approach them a little icon appears hovering over them, but right as you get close enough to interact, the indicator what looks like circle suddenly transforms into a triangle, leading you to press the wrong button every single time. Now yes, I’m playing this off for comedic effect but what isn’t funny is when you sit down and realize this is a triple A game, how the fuck did this make it out? Fuck right outta here with this weak shit. Spiderman? Would’a been higher but WHOOPS pressed the wrong button, #7 only loser.

[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 6, Splatoon 2’s Octo Expansion, except for the grinding levels.”

Except for the grinding levels, Splatoon 2’s Octo-expansion is the gnarliest of all gnarls. It’s got that fire hip-hop aesthetic, these popping and bumping tunes, this minimal story that still manages to pull it all together and end with an impact, but most important holy hell do these levels rock! The levels starts even before it starts, you gotta pick a loadout for it, some giving you more points at the end aka, they’re difficulty levels, and then when you go in you have to pay with an in-game currency to play the level, and you don’t start with very much and you don’t get very much for clearing. So it’s like, you’ve alway got doom looming over you. It motivates you to clutch your absolute hardest to every stage. All the twists and turns, all the combat, all the puzzles, hell man there’s just so much in these stages I can’t even describe it all. It’s funny I was playing this game around the same time I was working on that video about Metal Gear Solid’s VR Missions, and I was really thinking of trying to work in there a bit about how Octo-Expansion honestly feels like more of a sequel to MGS’s VR stages than any other game in its own series, but hey, I guess it was worth saving for now instead. You have Splatoon 2 and you like yourself some good fucking level design, you owe it to yourself to check this this out... except… except for the grinding levels jesus christ how come sometimes you jump ya got no freaking forward momentum? What’s going on here? 

[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 5, Hamish Black.”

Hey coming it at #5 it’s ya man, Hamish Black. Full disclosure, if you consider the combined packaged of Hambo and Nico a single title, definitely would be game of the year.
[Nico]: “This is a dumb thing”
[Hamish]: “Goddamnit”
Sadly, they’re sold separately but hey, don’t hate the player, hate the “writing-on” game.

So I don’t know into how much detail wanna go here, I mean, after all, my final Patreon goal is to write a sociotechnical analysis of the man, but uh. Look, Hamish is one of the purest-hearted game video bois you can meet, and he’ll be your dad if you let him. What do I mean by that? Look, man’s got style, man’s got grace, man’s even got a really funny podcast he runs with the aforementioned Nico Bleackley.

[Nico]: “I’ve been called a hipster in the past, accused!”

And the deal is, look, if you subscribe to Hambo’s channel, Writing on Games, you’ll be satisfied enough. You’ll regularly be fed delicious pieces, sometimes on actively relevant games Hambo’s bustin’ his ass on to get a word out to read ya in on, a word that ain’t nobody else in time for embargo lift’s gonna have prepped in time. Sometimes they’re on the goldy oldies, hearing Hambo take a retrospective look-back at something that happened some time ago, that hey, maybe you never thought about. And sometimes it’ll be Hamish fucking Black just reflecting on certain components of the industry he writes about, from his point of view, standing in the middle of sweaty crowds of gamers at events, brain on. And for most viewers, for me even for a while, that’s more than enough. He’s real, he constantly makes clear that a lot of his takes come from his personal experiences, he’s personable and relatable and transparent as all hell, and that’s exactly what you want out of a games writer. I mean, even though, let’s be real, he’d have every right to be at this point, Hambo doesn’t come it slinging slash from atop some high horse. He justifies everything he says, every conclusion he makes is the product of a thousand thoughts juggled and juggled and juggled and that his video serve the purpose of showing us the filtered view, the presentable version, the tip of the iceberg of.

The thing is, if you give yourself to him, he’ll dish you out more. Listening to him and Nico’s podcast, the Writing on Games cast, gives you excellent context weeks in advance to the final video projects he drops. I don’t know if he realizes it or not, but, like, listening to the podcast you’ll hear him express feelings about games or events that are still partly recognizable post-process of making them points in a video. It’s like, sitting on a couch with a dude who’s just shooting the shit with out about a game, and then next week he comes back all suited up with a full on powerpoint deck of focused slides and a conclusion, or a really personal expression, it’s like, it’s so dope.

There’s also the fact that you’ve got this whole, I don’t know, I’m gonna call it narrative, but you’ve got this narrative where this dude who never really asked for much is now suddenly finding himself in the big leagues. He’s getting invited to press events as a personality, he’s on busses chatting up with voice actors from game’s he’s criticized, but like, he hasn’t lost anything, he hasn’t changed, he’s super humble but he’s committing to that bit out of what seems like genuine and honest curiosity. It’s like, we all get to experience this wild ride he’s on through him because he’s not taking advantage of it or anything, he’s just letting it happen because he wants to know what comes next. And it’s like, I don’t know man, it digs dude. 

And on a personal note, as far as my experiences have gone with the, uh, video game, Hamish Black, this year. Like, okay, I won’t bore y’all with the details cause every time I stream these days it always devolves into me just sitting down and singing this tune with y’all over chat.But I have what we’ll call audience issues, and by what I mean is that my channel’s only growth comes from videos that attract the sorts of people who are the same sorts of people who unsubscribe in mass every time I upload something new I’ve worked really hard that’s not like the sort of video that attracted them in the first place. I know I’ve said before that I’m in this to have fun and that I’m basically completely self-motivated, but uh, I kinda had to come to terms recently after being unable to put my hands to writing for over a month straight that I was lying to myself. At least, during that time, recently, it really felt like it was demotivating me. And it’s not that I’m bothered by the fact that I’m not growing, because technically I am, but it’s more I’m bothered that I could be and instead I keep having spongebob fan sent to my doorstep who don’t wanna hear any what I’m preaching these days. Like, I feel like I’m being bullied by a video suggestion system beyond the scope of my effect, and that, recently, made it really hard to get any work done.

But hey, if youtube’s suggestion system is my bully, then Hamish is the bigger kid on the playground what fucks bois up.

You won’t believe what’s, what’s interrupting my vo right now. It’s literally, I’m gonna try to film it. There’s a tractor piling leaves up literally right outside the window, look at this. Oh my fucking god they’re still fucking with these leaves!

[shower curtain rustling]

Hamish is immensely generous and basically most of my positive growth this year has come from a couple a shoutouts he made that he really didn’t have to. It really makes a difference, cause here he is, this dude who’s assembling a crowd of people who wanna listen to him, and here’s a couple of us trying to rally up our own around our messages, and Hamish is just like yo I got you guys, he just directs people to us, to people like me and my friends, and it, it makes a big difference.

It makes as much… you know what? you know what? Its very much like this fucking tractor right now, like, yo what the fuck!? That’s what this is all about! Hold on I gotta film it! See, see this truck right here, this tractor? See how it’s carrying all the leaves? That’s Hamish. And see that truck? That’s its uh, it’s, I can’t focus on it, but, see that truck? Yeah there's a truck. So Hamish is this tractor holding all the leaves, and that truck that currently only has a few littles leaves in it, that’s me. That’s me and all my friends. That’s me and all my friends ok? And see what Hamish is doing is he lifts, he takes all, he’s like “you want these leaves” and we’re like “well I mean okay” and he’s like “please, take them, take them all, take them, please, you’re my friends and I like you very much”. OOOOuf and he dumps them all over there. Eh, uh, right there, like that, that’s exactly what he does. It’s really, it’s incredible symbolism. You see, you see this little, this little loser tractor over here, this little tractor? Over there there’s Hamish, and there’s this little tractor all alone. It’s just total lonely little tractor and it’s got no real friends. That’s uh, that’s TurboButton right there.


This year in particular was pretty bad for me, a couple of big name youtubers who’d never made spongebob videos before decided this to, which meant hey I got a ton of traffic in from those guys making spongebob relevant again. So Hamish was like the counterbalance that kept things from tipping over. And I only bring this up because I know he’s gonna watch this, and I know that to him it’s selfless, it’s thoughtless, he’s just does things cause he wants to do them, and he doesn’t really get to see the impact of it and I kinda wanna share that with him, and it’s hard to do so without basically explaining it. So uh, Hamish, thanks for fighting off these bullies dude, it uh, it really means a lot. And uh, fuck it I’m gonna spoil the rest of the Game of the Year list here but there ain’t a human on this list passed this point, so uh, as far as people go, Hamish is Game of the Year, so it give it to him ladies and gentlemen.

Um, but, not actual game of the year, sadly, he uh, he easily gets trumped and bumped by our next entry, check it guys.


[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 4, the Instant Pot.”

The Instant Pot is a pressure cooker my dad got me for Christmas last year. It was at the center of at least one stream that ended in the BK Joe disaster of freaking... whatever, guys, listen, you can make fresh, piping hot applesauce in 5 minutes with this thing. Watch, I’m even gonna play the whole thing out, look.
Can Hamish do that? No. Can anyone is Scotland do that? Nah, not a chance. This machine is better than everyone in an entire country, sorry Hambo, but ya didn’t stand an apple of a chance.

Now on the topic of doing really important things really quickly, let's check out the next entry on our Games of the Year list.

Ok, full, full disclosure, I know I said it’s like two minutes, technically it is, I left out some things, obviously. Um, there was some setup time, cutting the apples notably, um putting them in, filling it with a little bit of sugar and cinnamon. Um, and also so the pressure cooker doesn’t start right away, some people don’t understand that you you, it has to build pressure, uh, and then once its done building pressure, then it cooks for 2 minutes, and then you, um, you leave it some time to let the uh, the pressure release, you might have seen some steam, the camera doesn’t really pick it up very well, um. And then after that you kinda gotta wait for it to cool down, but my camera right now says 35 minutes, a lot of that time was wasted. Takes about, I wanna say 7 to 10 minutes to build up the pressure plus the uh, the, the 2 minutes to cook, you know what? Very, very highballing estimate, lets say its uh, 15 minutes and you’ve got steaming hot, steaming hot like so hot you can’t even eat it right now. I’ve brought it to a couple of parties, nothing slays people better then when you have some ice cream to put on top cause then you can eat it cause then the temperature is fine. You can put it even in a paper bowl, oh. It’s unbelievable, you can just do this in the morning man. Oh, it's way too hot. Sometimes in the morning you have leftover fruit from the week you wanna get rid of, you just chuck em in the thing and you just make like fruit stew, done! Done! Maybe you make some oatmeal on the side but you don’t even have to man, you just have like, pulverized, pressurized freaking fruit flesh. Mmmh. I’m gonna go actually edit this part of the video while I eat the rest of this.


[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 3, Quitting a Job”

Last year you may remember that #3 on this list was “Getting a Job”, I mean it was the best collectathon in the year of the revival of collectathon platformers. Well it turns out its success was short lived because it’s sequel, #3 this year, “Quitting a Job”, totally diverges along every vector. Genre, gameplay, story, everything is different, and as it turns out it’s objectively better than what came before it.

Listen, here’s something I’ve learned. Just because you’re having fun, just because you like the people you work with, you feel mostly respected and you mostly respect everyone else, it doesn’t mean you owe anyone anything. You should be able and allowed to recognize when you’re getting the raw deal, and you shouldn’t have to wait over a year for the right deal to come following a promise. I know a few people here are aspiring programmers, folks studying computer science and software engineering. I’ve talked to quite a few of you guys, trying to help with advice and whatever. Well, now that I’ve been in the market, outta school, here’s my advice for when you get here. Someone offers you a contingent contract position with a promise to make you permanent after a few months? I don’t care if you’re just starting your career and don’t feel confident in yourself, but turn it down. If someone’s not committed enough to fully hire you right off the bat, you shouldn’t be committed enough to accept they’re offer. Move on, keep applying, you’ll find something better. Otherwise you risk working and getting very comfortable and happy somewhere where nobody is prioritizing your employment but is expecting you to be a little bellhop and you have to end up taking your job security into your own hands and hey, yeah, eventually you’ll have to quit.

I mean, it’s not like it’s all that bad, you’ll gain some great experience, you’ll have some fun, but ultimately it’ll only be to help to fluff up your resume and make you look better to the next guys. Which hey, maybe you coulda tried starting at in the first place. Look, make sure you’re taken care of, don’t let yourself get hassled too hard, not that it exactly happened to me, but don’t let anyone take advantage of you because you don’t know yet how valuable you are, and if nobody’s looking after you and it’s time to quit, it's time to quit. Hold yourself up, you’ll be alright, it’s just, if you grow to love the people you work with, damn it can be tough to have to leave.

Anyways, sequel owns the prequel, enough said. We’re down to the line now, top 2 baby.

[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 2, Having Friends”

Last year #2 was “Making Friends”, a game with a few easily exploitable strategies that could be used to progress through it pretty easily once you got passed its rather excessive opening segment. But that’s what’s great, the intro being so long is like a barrier to entry that keeps in only the most dedicated players, and seeing as how some of it’s chapters are co-op, it guarantees that you’ll always be matched with other interested players.

And this year that’s where we’re at. Second place Game of the Year 2018 goes to “Having Friends”. Kevan, last year's Game of the Year, passed me forward this saying, “Commit to the Bit”, which living by for the past year has not only helped in making friends and but also in keeping them and enriching my relationships with them.

In my school years I kinda dropped a lot of NOs. People invited me somewhere to something, default response I’d just kick it in, NO. And so what happened was people stopped inviting me to crap.

In my defense, for a while I lived in the sorta place that without a car wasn’t really the easiest to get around, you needed like a full week’s notice just to plan how to get to a friend’s house. And getting downtown, yeah it was mostly easy, but busses in my town ended earlier in the night than the city, so I always had this curfew spotting me that caused me to bail on a lot of invites. So I’d kinda just end these early nights and study from home a lot. Basically, my living situation and school workload didn’t really accommodate the sort of lifestyle I have now.

These days I’ve just been popping it, making friends, saying YES, ending up weird places at weird times, talking to people for hours over a few drinks, changing plans last minute, setting up plans last minute. I’m living much more Ad Hoc than I ever have. Living on-island definitely helps, but not being in school has had just as big of an impact, not only in terms of the workload from actual professional job being less than school projects, but in terms the sorts of friends I’ve been having and making.

So there’s this observation from network studies that individuals in any sort of dynamic graph will tend to be more closely connected to nodes that are more similar to them than nodes that aren’t. This is called homophily, and one of its impacts is that where you’ll find one entity of some type, you’ll likely find many more closeby. Now there are a whole slew of reasons this happens which I won’t go into, but this why, for instance, many large cities have class and cultural divisions; you have your rich westmounts, your unincorporated communities like chinatowns and little-italys, and why a lot of people in specific highly focused university programs happen to have a lot in common.

Now, not to trash my friends, they’re all great, but finishing school getting really close to the same few folks for so many years, I was worried that down the line my friendscrape would remain a social enclave, that I’d be a software guy who’s only friends were other software guys.

Getting a Job last year helped because I went from sitting in auditoriums full of hundreds of software engineering students to being one of two programmers in a marketing team.

So when I played last year’s “Making Friends”, I focused a lot on building friendships with people from circles that I didn’t have any experience with prior, and not in a malicious or cold or bad-natured sort of way, but more in a sort of way that aligned more with “wanting as many different kinds of people to have an impact on my life and help me shape it, just as much as I’d like to help them and be a small part of their lives and maturity”. Doing this and allowing this to happen naturally for a while, this leveled up my character, so to speak. I mean this is a video game after all.

See, a big part of Having Friends, as I’ve hinted, is learning from them and their experiences, and sharing your own with them. Your save file from the previous game gets carried over though, so the quality of that learning turns out is actually dependent on your progress in the previous game. And so while it might seem unfair to give the #2 Game of the Year spot to “Having Friends” mostly for reasons having to do with my progress in the previous game, to consider Having Friends the second best part of my life this year only because the friends I made last year were so good, well, frankly I don’t care, it’s my list I can do what I want.

Like any good game from a long-standing series, the best way to take it forward is to rely on the best parts of its prequels and expand upon them, and clearly, Having Friends does. Well deserved, the developers and everyone involved in its creation should be very proud of themselves and I can’t thank them enough. They’ve allowed me to finally experience a lifestyle I’ve been missing out on for way too long, they’ve helped me grow and mature in a direction I’m proud of and wouldn't have without them, and they’ve allowed me the opportunity to, in turn, be trusted by them and help just as they have me.

I’ve made some pretty good friends, I’ve had some pretty good friends. Godspeed y’all, come back and visit some time.

But now, and on the subject of “visiting”, the moment you guys have most certainly been waiting for. In a year of, eh, I don’t know, some pretty ok games, one stood out. One video gaming experience I had this year went above all the rest, went so far above that there’s nothing really to compare it against. Almost unfairly I’d say, there’s no way to properly measure this game, and that’s why it’s gotta be the winner.

Without further ado, the Game of the Year 2018 is...


[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Number 1, ShrekFest”

Shrekfest is a festival held every labor day weekend in Madison Wisconsin now for the last 5 years, and happily, I attended its fifth installment this year. Now first, some mentions are in order, shout out to ya bois Matt aka MML’s Commentaries and Zac Frazier aka… uh, Zac Frazier. Oh also Zac’s friend John, he doesn’t have a youtube channel so uh, he’s definitely the most well adjusted of the crew. So ye, check em, definitely gonna be stealing some footage from em since this game was so huge I could only capture a bit of gameplay myself, we’ll see what’s happening.

Now, here’s the fucking thing about Shrekfest 2018 and in particular my experience there. See, the whole way home, back to Montreal from freaking Madison Wisconsin, I knew I had just participated in a moment of personal history, one of my own and no doubt for many other attendees. So the first thing I did when I got home was starting writing about while it was still fresh in my mind. I decided that night in the uber home that Shrekfest would be topping my Game of the Year list, so I wanted to give as good a retelling of it as possible and my best recommendation to you all.

I wrote an 11 page piece on my experience at Shrekfest 2018, but over those 6 and a half thousand words something happened. I began to overanalyze things, spend more time on the downs than the ups. I mean, it’s no secret, it’s much easier to talk at length about flaws than it is a working system, but in my writing I let it get to me. I came out of writing about Shrekfest less satisfied with my spent time there than I was on the plane rides home, and that was fucked.

So fuck that script, I’m not going to give you the history or the context of this game, I’m not gonna tell you how the fest originally came to be or how we came to be there 5 years later. I’m just gonna give you the facts; that there is indeed a Shrek themed festival every labor day weekend in Madison Wisconsin, I know some people still don’t believe it but it's true, and that three of us youtube video essay bois +1 managed to get there, and that while nothing may have really gone according to plan, the three of us managed to make it one of the best times ever, certainly worthy of the title of Game of the Year.

Based on previous years and marketing for the event, we had only a few expectations. The public and free event would have contests of the roaring, costume, and onion eating variety, there’d be live music covering most of the Shrek soundtrack, lots of sick merch, lots of goofs, lots of gaffs, and of course the night would be topped off with a screening in the park of the film Shrek itself, not to be confused with the monster.

[Shrek cover band]: “Disappointment haunted all my dreams”

There was also rumor on the facebook page for the event that there’d be a pub crawl proceding all of this and we were definitely looking to get shreked that night so aaay.

I was also stoked at the chance to meet the 3Gi, a comedy troupe from Milwaukee who you should remember from last year's Game of the Year list and some dudes I’ve been a fan of for ages now. I mentioned last year how when you order shirts from their website, they alway include a random piece of trash or prop from one of their videos, and I’ve had in my posession for a few years now this cutout paper they used for a practical transition effect one time, so coming to Shrekfest I actually brought it with me hoping they’d find it cool that it made it all the way to Canada and back, and I was gonna ask Grant to sign it, but, ouf, uh, here we go.

Now when it came down to it, Shrekfest failed to deliver on most of those back-of-the-box promises. As far as expectations go, all us gang missed out on all but two of the contests and kinda the pub crawl. See, shortly after being interviewed by youtube channel TheDeShrektives on some live stream and then entering a dance pit for about two songs, the sky just opened up and let it pour on us. Recent floods in the area left the venue was ill-prepared to handle this many people inside its little shelter, so this ass, who coincidentally was also an ass, got up and told us all that we were officially rained out and the fest would continue at a bar in town called HopCat, going as far as to start a chant to make sure we all knew what was up.

[crowd chanting]: “HOPCAT HOPCAT HOPCAT HOPCAT HOPCAT HOPCAT HOPCAT WOOOO!”

So the three of us figured hey let's head there early and beat the crowd. We ended up hitching a ride with a man who we’re convinced is actually Shrek. He and his wife offered us a ride in their van and we immediately accepted. These guys were absolutely dedicated. This by the way is the same dude you’ve probably seen from this viral image going around of a shrek being stopped by cops, got to talk to him quite a bit over the ride to the bar, turns out that they were here on a late honeymoon they never took following their marriage which was actually conducted in a real swamp. I’m not gonna drop this dude’s personal facebook pictures and stuff in here, but trust me, I’ve seen evidence, these dudes were the ultimate Shrek-heads.

So anyways to make a long story much shorter than what it actually was and to cut out a lot of legitimate frustration, what ends up happening is we show up to this bar and they tell us to leave because whoops, turns out there was no official deal between them and Shrekfest to host us and even if there had been, there’s sure as hell wasn’t any place left seeing as how not only was this weekend host to Shrekfest, but it was moving weekend for all the college kids coming back AND Metallica was in town kicking off a tour. So the whole town was littered with like, young students and old white-haired white dudes. Onion’s chance in a swamp we’d be making it into any bar as a group of a few hundred.

Not only that, but the organizers of Shrekfest start streaming the onion eating contest live to facebook now, still happening back at the same park under the tiny shelter that we were told to leave, and we’re missing it. Basically what it felt like was they’d directed a bunch of people away to thin out the crowd enough so that they could all fit under the little roof they had, and hey I guess it worked. They never told us to come back, never told us where to finally go, the facebook event was flooded with message from people looking for direction from the organizers who just weren’t helping.

So after a good long while of bumming around downtown Madison and reading posts from other stragglers who left the park when they were told and left the bar when they couldn’t get in, we had an idea.

We were feeling down because we were missing out on something, we had all come a really long way to be here and now it was just kind of ogre. But, that’s exactly how everyone else was feeling. If only, say, there was something else to do, maybe all us stragglers could band together and still make a night out of this. So that’s exactly what we did. The four of us started responding to people on facebook with unanswered requests to the organizers for instructions on where to go next, and we started just telling them to meet us as the bar. Once we’d assembled a pretty decent crowd we took a picture, which sadly doesn’t do it justice as most folks were standing on a sidewalk out of frame but whatever, we posted this to the page telling people what was up, and that hey, maybe the official event was a bust but there was a sizeable amount of people down to hang out anyways at this bar. So we all went back to the bar, one by one, and made our own reservations, we slowly but surely filled the place up. And the more of us there were the more confidence other lost shrek folk had to trek out and join us.

[Zac]: “Matt, explain exactly what’s happening.”
[Matt]: “Okay. Denis is taking charge of Shrekfest right now. It got, it got rained out, and then they were saying go to HopCat but HopCat doesn’t know anything about Shrekfest. So now, we waited outside, and now we’re just getting everyone to make table reservations and just come on. And now he’s trying to get them to seat everyone in the same spot.”
[Denis]: “I gotta do it! I gotta do it!”
[Zac]: “You’re the savior, thank you.”
[Denis]: “Ye, we’re gonna try our fucking best.”


We got to just hang out for a good few hours with a ton of folks, talk about who were were, how far we’d traveled, why we were there. This is where we met these dudes, and this dude, and this dude, who won the onion eating contest by the way after finishing three fucking onions cause he tied twice, dude looked like he wanted to die right there. And of course, these dudes, we actually hung out with them for most of the rest of the night, even chilled in Matt and Zac’s hotel room for a bit since it turned out we were all bunking under the same roof.

But that’s one of the reasons Shrekfest had to be game of the year this year. There’s definitely something to be said about the quality of a game that fails so hard to meet the expectations its set for itself but still has strong enough interconnected systems to allow for player driven emergent gameplay scenarios so open-ended that players can actually design their own games within it. Shrekfest is a game where the right players with the right motivation can fuck off with the broken main quest and fumble together their own levels for themselves and other players to play, all to everyone’s benefit. You thought Breadth of the Wild was were things were at? Ouf, get outta my swamp.

Over breakfast the next day the four of us kinda brought up how wild it was that, like, if it weren’t for us being there, that wouldn’t have happened. We were the right people and we were enough people on our own to convince people it was worth hanging out with us. We were a gang of four, already a party, we had a neat story about how we all met online that people dug, and of course I was fully decked out repping my home and native land of Canada so it was an consistently effective ice-breaker. There were definitely a lot of people who’s nights would’ve ended short if it weren’t for us, and that made us really happy. It was dope, we got a real big crew, we chanted shrek, we made some noise.

[us chanting]: “SHREK SHREK SHREK SHREK”

It was hours until the actual organizers made it back to their own party, but at this point it wasn’t really their party, it was kind of ours. Our collective desire to crawl pubs outmatched any loyalty we felt for the hour or two we got to spend at the actual fest before we were told to leave. But anyways, we met a lot of really cool people.

[pubcrawlers singing]: “You’ll never know if you don’t go! You’ll never shine if you don’t glow! SHREK! Hey now! You’re an all-star! Get your game on! Go! Play! Hey now! You’re a rockstar! Get the show on! Get paid! And all that glitters is gold! Only shooting stars break the mold!”

Surprisingly to me at least, turned out most folks really weren’t there for the Shrek crap at all, if fans of anything, most were actually just fans of 3Gi. Nobody else there could really pinpoint an exact reason as to why there were there, I mean, neither could I really.

After totally commandeering the party, hitting up a few bars and getting to know some people better though, I kinda realized what it was for most people. Nobody was there because they actually cared that much about Shrek, I’m almost convinced nobody on earth is truly a fan of Shrek. That’s why when asked at the fest about it, people overreact, clearly exaggerate their appreciation for it. So here’s the thing, Shrekfest isn’t actually about being a fan of Shrek, and even though it looks like I’m headed that way it’s not even about being a fan of pretending to be a fan of Shrek. No, Shrekfest is a festival for goofy-ass people to hang out with other goofy-ass people, and the barrier to entry being pretending to be a superfan of anything is just like a giant filter to keep in only the dopest folks. Shrekfest has nothing to do with Shrek and everything to do with the sorts of people who would go to something called Shrekfest, if that makes any sense. It’s about knowing the sort of person you are and knowing you’ll find others like you there.

Here’s one of my craziest stories from the fest. So, last year BobbyBroccoli won game of the year, and his life motto he left me with was “Commit to the Bit”, yada yada I’ve been living it by it for quite a while now and reciting it to anyone who asks why I do certain things I do. You could imagine, I gave it as a reason to quite a few people at the fest.

[Deshrektive]: “What’s your real stated reason for being out here today? Do you, do you worship at the altar of shrek, or is it a more casual sorta thing?”
[Denis]: “Commit to the bit dude.”

So we’re at our second bar and I’m talking to this girl who turned out was in this inflatable shrek outfit, she kinda became our mascot for the pub crawl definitely left an impression on us all. So she’s telling me about how her and her girlfriend are larpers and they made fun of some dude’s ogre costume at a convention one time, and then he told them about shrekfest and whatever, so I asked her, like, why she took it so far. Like, most people there were there goofing, but fully embodying the life of the party, she was taking it to the next level so I asked her why. And then she just goes to me “you know man, just commit to the bit”, and that kinda stopped me dead in my tracks. I mean, I had a few drinks in me at this point so I just kinda asked her “wait, have we been speaking before this” and she’s like “no why?” and I’m like “are you sure I didn’t tell you about commit to the bit?” and she’s like “nah, I’ve been saying that for years, I live by it” and I was just like “whohohoooa” and I told her the whole story about commit to the bit and everything, but what I think the Bud Lights I had in me were preventing me from realizing at that exact moment was that this is what Shrekfest is about. Shrekfest is the sort of party that’s able to bring people who live by the same motto together, and that’s fucking unbelievably dope dude.

So uh, that’s really that. That was Shrekfest, Game of the Year 2018, the most memorable time I’ve had this year, a pure time with cool friends, an awesome game that allowed us to immerse ourselves in so completely as to become it and transform ourselves and it into our own image, an image of a party with a lot of fun.

Also, the looks on all those old white haired white dudes’ faces when they came back after the Metallica concert and we’d already loaded Smash Mouth and Hallelujah into all the fucking jukeboxes as many times as we could ahahaha holy fucking shit.


So, Shrekfest 2019, you gonna be there? Cause I’ll be there. Matt’s gonna be there. Zac’s gonna be there. I hope Jon’s there. Hamish, Nico, you guys gonna be there? You better be there. Shrekfest, uh, here’s the deal. So this is what we’re doing, we are turning Shrekfest into the anual video essay community meet-up. If you’re a video essay family member, uh, come to Shrekfest. Listen, every labor day weekend, you know you have it off, you come to Shrekfest, we’re gonna do it, we’re, look! We’re just, that’s what it is! We’re looking for an excuse to meet each other, fucking Madison freaking Wisconsin, labor day weekend, every year, its guaranteed. Um. Yeah. So, let’s do it. Maybe it’ll be game of the year next year, who freaking knows, whooohooooooooaaa.

And last but not least, uh, we gotta one more thing because, so many good games, gotta highlight a bad game. It’s the all time worst game of 2018 is…


[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Hamish Black is the worst game of the year for deleting his twitter account”

Yeah so you know, as it turns out, you know, maybe even a game that is already nominated can also be a bad, the worst game. Listen, Hamish, you were a very good game this year, a very good game, but, uh, you made one critical mistake and you deleted your twitter account and now you can’t even come up, do all these antics and stuff. I’m just delaying a little bit. Why? Maybe you’ve noticed there’s a change of setting here, I’m back at my, I’m back in my mother’s house, I’m in my mother’s basement right now, uh, here to record, there’s a microphone set up, maybe you think there’s a little bit something fishy going on. Let’s be real, you know what’s happening. I’m here at my mother’s because I need to make some fucking noise Hamish. I’m gonna a Hamish Black a Hamish heart-attack.

[woman I paid on fiverr’s voice]: “Final Fantasy XV Pocket Edition it’s actually poopoo”

Actually no the real worst game of this year is Final Fantasy XV Pocket Edition. It’s such a freaking disappointment on every level! Like, who is this game for? Who is it for? Whooooo? Whooooo wants this? It’s so fucking baaaad. Like, okay look its really cool, its really cool that they were able to do this and it really speaks a lot to the quality of the software they did, everything I’ve said about this game in the past still applies and this only brings that, it brings my arguments even to a better, arg, uh, state of argumentation, but listen! It’s fucking ridiculous! Oh my god I can’t. I really can’t, I was like, su, I was like aaaahh bee play it, pffffft, listen! This game is, this game is poopoo caca dude. This game is, is diarrhea. This game, ooooooouuuu. This game makes a monkey cry into a banana. This game makes me want to qwaaaaaa bambambaaba. This gaaaaame is, uh, dude it’s so freaking bad.

Hello Hamish Black, hold onto your bowbags you stinky boi. Smelly daddy. My name has been KingK and I certainly hope you have some well deserved fun today.

Pikmin 3? Okay.

Now, before we get started I’ve gotta get some housekeeping / disclaimers out of the way. First, as you may not know, this video on Pikmin 3 and why it stresses me out is actually the 4th, or 5th depending on how you look at it, in a series I’ve done on all the Pikmin games, starting with the 1st and 4 things I thought you’d need to know about it, followed by the 2nd and how it is figuratively and literally poisonous, which itself was followed by a standalone deep-dive on one of its deep dungeon levels, the Submerged Castle, which of course is being followed up by with today’s video.

In the past when I’ve gone over series like this watching the previous ones wasn’t necessarily a prerequisite. If any point I’m trying to make has some sort of dependency to any information from a previous video, I try to inject it here first. However with this one I feel a little different. Pikmin is huge, it’s massive, so I feel like having been immersed in it for so long working on this video, there may be information I’ve come to take for granted as obvious and so haven’t properly highlighted it in what’s to come but have in previous videos. So, I hope this video can be viewed properly on its own without the others, but that may not be the case and I may not be able to tell. What I can tell you though is that I’ve tried my best to ensure that if there’s anything left behind in this video, you should be able to pick it up by watching the previous ones later. That’s to say I don’t think the order of my pikmin videos really matters. So, my call to action, I invite you to check out the other pikmin videos whenever you have a chance. This is the 4th is not a series but rather what I’ve tried to make a set of videos about this video game series, a personal favorite of mine. Whatever you feel more comfortable with, either checking out the previous videos before or after this, I encourage you to do, otherwise I mean it's your life fam, fucking live it.

And secondly, this is something I’ve never had to do before but I, I just wanna disclaim that this video’s gameplay footage might look a little weird. Very frequently you’ll see the game look like it’s paused and have the camera fly around all over the place. I have a feeling this will be very distracting and I just wanted to mention it in advance to try to mitigate the impact of it on y’all and, let's be real, the amount of comments I’ll be getting from years to come about what the fuck is going on with the camera.

Now, the reason this happens is because this is a WiiU game and so some of the gameplay happens on the gamepad screen. During these sorts of interactions, the main display plays a complementary role and so without all the UI it kinda looks goofy. I did record quite a bit of gamepad footage but I’m not gonna be including it over the entire video, I only want to have that on-screen when I’m specifically trying to make a point about it. At all other times, yeah, you’re gonna be seeing this weird camera darting stuff and I just wanted to give you a heads up because there’s not really much I could do, this is what tv gameplay looks like of this game.





So, with all that out of the way let's finally dive into it, and by dive into it I mean start with a quick explanation of the previous games in the series.


Something really important to know about pikmin games is that they’ve never really been games for the sake of being games, if you know what I mean. This series hasn’t really had the straight-forward luxury of just being an idea translated simply into a game. Each, including the last, had ulterior motives for being the ways they did, and understanding the conditions of their releases is important when it comes to understanding their substances.

We’ve said it once, we’ve said it a million times, but Pikmin 1 was a tech-demo first and a game second. Computers? Hah. Turns out they’re pretty complicated to explain and most people don’t really care about nitty-gritty. For same sort of reason humans are simplified as being batteries in the Matrix, Nintendo had to make it very digestible for people what their new hardware could do. Gamecube’s biggest enhancements were in memory and processing so these guys needed a piece of running software, a launch title, that showed those off. What does an application like that look like? Well, it needs to have a lot of different things happening all at once and it needs to show a lot more looking much better. Now a lot of games on the new console showed what’s like to render lots of high-poly 3d models with much higher resolution textures all thanks to more ram, but none so much as Pikmin showcased multithreading of all things at such a large scale.

Pikmin raised exactly what the gamecube console was about so perfectly it’s almost as though that was its primary goal. That’s because that’s exactly what it was. Pikmin didn’t start as an idea about a game where you command a force of tiny little workers to accomplish tasks larger than themselves, it started a demonstration of technology, of graphics and physics and ai and threading. A game was just painted on top of it. A good game? Yes it luckily so happened to be. A well thought out one though? Considering the main challenge in the game, a time-limit, being as easy to implement as it is to stamp your goddamn postage, I’d argue not. Miyamoto’s best efforts to merge classic game mechanisms and cutting-edge technology were enough to make a very enjoyable short little game, but nothing I think anyone in their right mind could call sustainable.

But it’s okay, that’s what Pikmin 2 and its two new directors’ covert goal was: to forget about trying to sell a piece of hardware and to look at those gameplay mechanisms and reevaluate what sort of game Pikmin was better suited to be.

And the first thing you notice on starting up the game, the first thing you’ll see anyone involved in its production mention right away when it’s the topic of discussion is how freaking quickly it makes clear that the time limit is gone. The game wears this fact on its sleeve, I even found something pretty funny, one of the directors referred to this, you know, a design change, a change from how things were done in the first game, literally just the removal of something that previously existed, man referred to this as “one of the biggest strengths of Pikmin 2”.

That’s like Woody shows up says “hey, one of the greatest strengths of this boot is that there is no longer a snake in it”! Pffft fucking fantastic!

Pikmin 2 wasn’t here to just be a game, it was here to be a second take at a game that was a little too busy selling a console to find a way to wrangle together an otherwise very well realized set of systems and ideas. Completely opposite to the arcade style challenge of the previous game, Pikmin 2’s unlimited time limit and procedurally generated dungeons turned it into some sort of hybrid survival roguelike game with its developers trying to stick its gameplay closer to the action label than strategy, not to mention spending an almost absurd amount of effort on story and world-building through flavor-text en masse.

Did it make for a good game? I definitely think so, it was certainly more engaging on more levels, it could take a well-paced player weeks to beat but also afforded different kinds of completion goals to different kinds of players. The makers of this game talk time and time again about trying to open it up and make it more approachable for the reason being, I can only assume, that they thought pikmin 1 appealed only to a very niche audience.

So finally that brings us to Pikmin the Third. What’s the deal this time huh? Well the story started out fine with it just being another re-think of the first game again though this time built from the ground-up for the Wii and with Miyamoto back on as director who really did not seem to be a big fan of pikmin 2. But suddenly history would find a way to repeat itself because Pikmin 3 wound up coming out years delayed and as a launch title for a new console, the Wii U. Now, okay, technically it was months late of the console’s actual release date, but as far as first-party titles being shown in an effort to sell the console, Pikmin 3 was the big boy.

Once again a Pikmin game found itself under the same director and under the same circumstances and then some! It had to once again go out of its way to sell a console, to demonstrate its capabilities, though this time that wouldn’t be accomplished as easily for obvious reasons. But new this time, on top of Pikmin having to sell the Wii U, it also had to build the damn thing at its own cost! Supposedly not much of what was made was kept during the migration from Wii to Wii U so rebuilding everything from scratch kept them busy enough, but as one of the first teams to be making a project for the new system, many times the developers of the game were forced to lend their efforts to the development of that system, building technology and features for the console that were incomplete and were needed in order to serve their game.

Kind of opposite of the story of the first game, you know, a tech demo that was very quickly filled out into a game. This time a collection of new ideas for a game was forced to become a quick tech demo. So what you get for the first time in the series is a game whose design has mutated, whose design is trying to be progressed towards something, but simultaneously is trying to do something completely unrelated: showcase all of the possible use cases of a, lets face it, an experimental gaming interface. An experimental gaming interface that doesn’t enhance the game in any natural sorta way, that can’t really show itself off without the game specifically accommodating it with even more new features.

So, how about we take a look at some of the design changes first because I think that’s a good idea I don’t hear anyone objecting, and to make this flow better let’s not dive into any major criticisms just yet. This is just, “hey, here’s what’s changed”, ya dig?

So new pikmin game, and given what we’ve see so far your first question should be… well, is the snake back in the boot? I mean uh, is the time limit back? The answer I wanna dramatically say is yes … and no… but it’s really it’s kinda just Yes… but also not really?

Fuck, okay, so here’s the deal. Pikmin 3 brings back the idea of a hard time-limit from the first game but recontextualizes it by kinda merging, or rather a better description would be “making it dependant” on a free treasure collecting mode similar to the second game. That’s confusing. Basically a time limit technically exists, but that time limit is presented differently, now in the form of portions of food which you consume one of each in-game day. The difference is that your goal in the game, collecting items, directly impacts that supply of food because the items you’re collecting are fruits. Though, again like how in Pikmin 2 different treasures had different monetary values that were subtracted from your company’s debt upon collection, the amount of juice processable is variable from fruit to fruit. Ultimately the same time limit as was in the first game and the same treasure hunting mode as was in the second are both present here, but now they’re bonded by a superglue handshake.

Also like the rest of the series, this change is represented in the story which is now about collecting fruits from an alien planet and returning their seeds home to avoid a food crisis.

As a consequence of this though one of the most ambitious features of Pikmin 2 had to be removed, the dungeons. The hyper focused, viciously challenging, borderline unfair dungeon segments were only really allowed to exist in the second game because for as hard as it could become inside dungeons, the 0 linear difficulty of the overworld and its unlimited supply of days with which to let you reproduce the population of your army balanced it out. The fact that you could literally not lose in Pikmin 2, that the game provided a built-in reset button, the fact that the game was unfairly biased to your success made excuse for the sorts of insane gauntlets that the dungeons were. But in the absence of this and in the presence once again of a time limit, these sorts of dungeons could not be available and so they got axed.

Now, to make up for the straight real-estate offered by such randomly generated dungeons, Pikmin 3 made the overworld levels much larger by splitting some into different areas divided by loading screens. So yeah, you’ll still explore a cave every now and again, the difference being that now it’s only purpose is as a change of scenery.

A whole new feature though introduced in this game was a 3 captain system. Now yeah, prior we’d had 2 captains but the adjoining of a third as well as the extension of some assistive automation features made this a big deal, particularly opening up your ability to multitask during play.

Now of course the game also added two new pikmin types and removed two others for being partial redundancies. Rock pikmin are the new purple guys, they hit really hard during combat and they can be used to smash glass and crystal obstacles. They however lost the ability to lift 10 times their weight but that’s okay because any puzzles revolving around that idea don’t exist.
The white pikmin were completely removed from the game along with all of the poison gas related puzzles that they were required for. So, so much for that whole thesis. Good riddance.

Taking their spot though is the new and very interesting flying pikmin type. They, and their applications all around are really fucking creative. You’d think this would open up a whole new vertical dimension to gameplay, you know having puzzles where you lift things and whatever, and you’d be right yeah, but what I really thought was cool was how many water puzzles they were needed for. What you learn is that since they can fly, they can follow a captain by hovering over the water, but since the captain can’t throw them from underwater you have a limited control and have to work around that. Especially considering how late into the game you unlock the final pikmin type, the blue ones, getting the flying ones first gives you a whole different perspective on water hazards and allows them to remain a very serious threat all the way until the last act without being overplayed or boring.

Further in the direction of that action game hybridization, Pikmin 3 revamped its combat system and I really wish I had more to say than what I’m about to. See, Pikmin’s always been the sort of game that you can very quickly do a bit a pushing and shoving with the bad guys and since they don’t respawn for very long time, eventually pretty much forget that there’s even fighting in the game. So not that it really matters too much but they added a lock on camera which makes it easier to target pikmin throws at specific body parts of enemies, which okay fair enough, this game makes a bit more of a deal out of… and there’s also a charge command that sends all pikmin out to attack at once as well as some new dodge buttons that I tried out exactly twice in the game purposefully, first immediately after unlocking it and second during this fight.

Seems weird because the old trumpet command from the first and second games covered both of these use-cases and then some. I really liked the trumpet because it gave you control over the pikmins’ position relative to you while walking. It was an invaluable tool in the dungeons who’s tricky layouts and traps often required you to keep an eye on your army’s formation. I guess the removal of dungeons might again be to blame for this but, I have talked enough about how pikmin walk for one video.

Finally, the last major change this game brought to the game was it removed camera controls. The old games had a camera that was kinda like a cross between an old 3d zelda and a racing game. As you moved the camera would stay fixed independent of your facing direction, but at any point you could force it behind you with a tap of the z-button. The camera’s elevation could also be toggled to a few different heights. Some were probably more suited to exploration and others to fighting and survival but I relied a lot on the furthest view that gave me the widest sight. It let me spot landmarks and paths up ahead that helped me trace paths in my mind through these large networks from where were I was to where I wanted to go and how to get back to my ship before sundown. The locking aspect of it was a particular help for this.

The camera wasn’t without its problems though, let’s be real. For as great as it was to be able to look at as much of your surroundings, often times your surroundings weren’t so great looking. I mean, by today’s standards no doubt, but even back then, I mean yeah, it’s hard to make models and textures that hold up given a variable camera distance. Sure, the camera’s control made me feel comfortable seeing what I wanted to see how I wanted to see it, but it also let me see a lot of technical jank that swiftly’d take you out of it.

And so as you can tell when it comes to this game and as I’ve so masterfully segued into, the camera controls were removed for a reason of course. They were put aside to make place for a dynamic camera system that was better able to show off how freaking beautiful this game can look. I mean after all, Pikmin 3’s running on some fancy new hardware that it’s trying to convince you to buy, gotta show that off.
Damn the game is gorgeous
It sounds weird to be talking about this in 2018, but this was one of Nintendo’s first first-party games being rendered with visuals considerate of a screen more than 480 pixels high.

That’s why the camera locks, because there’s so much more you do in terms of those visuals when you direct the camera rather than allowing the player to. So this allowed them to show it all off as best as they could. With this it was possible for them to apply techniques like blurs to the contours of the screen that produce a cool tilt-shift effect that for the first time in the series sells the scale of the world to you. The automatic camera and its perspective make you feel like you’re a kid kneeling in the grass looking down at an ant colony scuttering around, but other times by direction of its designers, its pans and tilts can allow you to see these worlds from a whole different points of view. Sometimes its just to present these breathtaking environments to you wholly rather than by a magnifying glass view at a time, but at other points its to make you feel claustrophobic or draw your eye to something or set the stage for a difficult boss fight.

And you know what? Ok, I know it’s a meme to say that the fruit looks good, but like, I don’t know man it’s the only game that’s ever made me crave grapes enough to get them out of season. There is foundation to this man.

Now, time to address the elephant sized gamepad in the room. Yeah, not only was Pikmin tasked with showing off the quality of visuals to expect on this new console, but it also had on its plate to try to explain to gamers what the hell this thing was all about.

Often forgotten though, ONE of the Wii U’s gimmicks was that games could be played directly on the gamepad screen while, I don’t know, your parents watched tv or some shit. Because hell yeah, that’s a problem that needed to be solved, by a video game controller. So not only did the game have to show us all how the gamepad could enhance gameplay as a secondary display part of this revolutionary two screen setup and new means of interaction… but it also had to show us all how it work without all that shit and on a single screen. Talk about conflicting requirements.

To make matters worse, recent Wii remakes of the first two Pikmin games set a new standard for its controls by using pointer tech. So what you had was a game that was best played with a pair of fucking nunchucks that now needed to be played on both 2 screens at a time and one at a time, all at the same time, somehow. So Nintendo did what Nindento does best: they killed two birds with two stones, or rather, killed a multitude of birds with an equal number of stones by allowing you to play the game basically however the heck you wanted with whatever control type. Which yeah, okay let’s be fair, is an exclusive kinda of premium personalization that wasn’t something you could do on any other platform.

You can play with the tv and the pad, you can play with just the pad. You got a different controller? Hell yeah it’ll work! What if you got nunchucks but no tv? It’s go you covered! Or of course there’s my favorite set up, the all-dressed: that’s got the tv for the main action, nunchucks for smacking bad boys, and the gamepad nicely propped up for map and other info displays. It might be an absolutely mess, and yes the fact that the two different wireless devices part of this kill their batteries at different rates is a goddamn pain in the ass, but once you’ve got your ass planted on the couch and the gamepad in reach and the wiimote visible to the motion sensor bar… guys whatever, call me a loser for putting it this way, but I don’t know how else to describe a play session like this but as a real hardcore gaming experience.

Small aside, but this old Wii and Wii U generation mentality towards control schemes is something Nintendo could definitely learn from today. Coming from there, it’s kinda shocking when recent games like Let's Go to the Polls Pikachu puts zero effort into normalizing the gameplay experience between tv mode and handheld mode, totally fucking with the accessibility of the game to some players. What a mess.

Now as far as the gamepad’s uses go when you’ve got your shit set up like mine, yo let me lay it on you. First of all, obviously enough, while your playing the gamepad displays an image of the parts of the level that you’ve so far visited. You remember that disclaimer about the camera going all jank though? Well here it is: at any point you can drag your finger across the screen’s map to look around. While you’re doing this the game pauses and the television displays the an in-game birds-eye view of the point you’re currently dragging over, letting you scout ahead and check out the positions of enemies and other obstacles. So that’s what’s been going on the whole time. Later in the game as you unlock more captains, this map dragging feature is turned into an automation tool for captains. With a captain selected you can drag your map to a point you’d like them to go to, then select to have them auto-pilot themselves and their pikmin over there, allowing you to switch to another captain and continue multi-tasking.

The map and the captain control were the biggest deals on the gamepad. Aside from that it was also used to track other information like pikmin numbers and from time to time the story would hijack it for some fourth-wall breaking shenanigans. It had a camera function that let you use gyro to snap pics of the world that would then appear in the world map screen which is really cool and all but... this is a game with a time limit, you don’t got time to sit around snapping pics. And of course one of the coolest things, at the end of each day while your stats appeared on tv, the gamepad would show a sped up version of your entire day. It was a great way to reflect on what you’d accomplished and what you should set out to do the next day. Really cool.

Now while the hardware and the UI were the two biggest changes that pikmin had mention in its pitch for the Wii U, the new console also came with it a new approach to online features. Pikmin 3 opted for easy mode here, including a simple leaderboard and bell-curve plot to compare yourself against other players once you’d beat the game. But the crazier way it went for it was by being one of the first Nintendo games ever to offer paid downloadable content. The Wii U came packed with a brand new eshop that promised to sell such expansion packs for games, and when it came to this one they decided that extra paid missions in the mission mode would be a good fit.

Historically I haven’t brought up the extra modes in Pikmin games they’re not really something I’ve been too invested in but I also have nothing to complain about when it comes to them. Evidently, this time that’s different, but now’s not the right time to whine, I’m holding my horses. We’ll get there.

So now we’ve got the lay of the land. We have series context, we know what the game was naturally trying to improve on and change, we have a picture of the environment the game was released in, and we know what sorts of additional impacts that environment had on its design. So now the field’s clear for me to uh, well, tell you what I think, finally.


So for all that talk about it, it's only fair to start with the hybrid time limit and treasure hunting system. I’ll give it to you straight, it’s a great middle ground, it shows some serious effort, cause yeah, I might love Pikmin 2 a whole lot but not everyone liked it’s lack of a time limit. The pure treasure hunting wasn’t for everyone and while I feel very strongly for it, I can understand why that is and why this is a very well thought out approach.

But here’s why I still think it’s flawed.

Like I’ve said, a lot of what I loved most about Pikmin 2 and what gave it a different identity than its prequel was dependent on there not being a hard-time limit in the main game. With this removal removed, a lot of other things made no sense anymore like the dungeons yada yada.

However with many features from the second game now removed in the third, those that remained were not left un-affected by the implications of such a hybrid time-limit and treasure hunting system. Big set-piece sections like boss fights and particularly tricky puzzles that previously could ramp up their difficulty and time necessary to complete to unprecedented levels could now… well… not. An in-game day in Pikmin 3 is 15 minutes long, meaning that everything, and I mean everything in the game, needed to be made doable in less than 15 minutes. Many were dumbed down or otherwise made easier but others that stuck to their guns suffered in the opposite way. It sucks ending a day with a puzzle left unsolved because you had no way of knowing when you started it that you just didn’t have enough minutes left to complete it.

Boss fights mirror this too. Some feel way too easy, but those that don’t let up have the problem of being exactly too long. You might have enough time in a day to make it to the boss arena and defeat them but you might not have enough time to carry all the items they drop back to base by sundown, making you waste a whole day back out in the field just to get that done. The attempted solution, I like, but it feels shoehorned in. A boss’ health doesn’t regenerate anymore overnight so the idea is that you can spend multiple days on a single boss if you’re not very good. If you are though, you’ll have that problem of not having enough time to carry shit back. I have played every pikmin game, except for this one, multiple times to completion and this crap happened to me so many times in this game that by the end of it I started adopting a strategy of not actually taking items all the way to my ship but rather dropping them off right close by. That way when the game would fuck me over and force me to play a new day just to pick up something I hadn’t enough time left to, at least I could keep myself occupied by picking up all the other crap I’d left for myself.

This is fucking ridiculous.

Obviously, it’s a disappointment that the game’s daily time limit prevents it from throwing much more creative challenges at you. I mean, look no further than how the fancy new 3 captain setup is used! There are just a handful of puzzles and only one boss fight in the game that seem to be aware of the fact that you can control 3 captains at a time now and that 3 captains can now launch each other. Technically that one boss fight doesn’t even, it only asks for 2 at once to battle the spider dude who can climb between these two isolated arenas, this is something that could’a worked in the second game, man.

The few puzzles though? Yeah, they’re decent. These rare moments are where the game finally seems self-aware and really shows off what all these changes are capable of when they’re all on the same page. But their scarcity that I’m critiquing here is due to nothing more than the fact that, shit, dude, their solutions take a lot of time to execute, time that you don’t really have under a strict 15 minute time limit.

And just to be crystal freaking clear, when I saw 15 minutes, I’m not deducting all the time it takes you to just mosey on your slow ass to where you wanna go, or to pick out your pikmin, or to carry stuff back. You know how people say you sit on the toilet for like a quarter of your life or whatever? Yeah I’m not counting that when I say 15 minutes.

What I’m trying to say I guess is that, the reinstatiation of the time limit and the consequence of it being the removal of such dungeon type levels that operated without it cursively disables the game from properly invoking the complex new 3 captain system it has. What you expect coming from an expansion of an existing system like this is that the game’s levels will be designed in a way where you’re doing things that only 3 captains could do together. But instead what you’re really doing the the sort of stuff a single captain could do, you’re just doing it 3 times at once spread across the map. What I’m saying is, you’re not playing one game with 3 captains. Stressfully you’re playing 3 games each with one captain. And what I’m trying to say is that, I think that’s the fault of the time limit.

Honestly I think my favorite parts of the game are when some story beats limit you to only one or two captains. Once you get all three it becomes a huge mess.

And not necessarily because there’s so much going on, but because the more captains you have the less pikmin you have. See Pikmin games have always hard a hard 100 pikmin limit. However in the past the games only allowed you to mosey on around with one captain at a time so it wasn’t a big deal.

In this game you start with with only one captain and massive squads on you which feels great, but as the limit doesn’t change and your numbers of captains and pikmin types do, your knees begin to buckle under the weight of all the bullshit. The pace of the game is destroyed with 3 captains. Splitting the squads up evenly, that’s about 33 pikmin per captain. Considering that many items and enemy corpses take upwards of 5, sometimes even more than 10 pikmin to carry back to base, that severely limits the general effectiveness of a single captain. It forces you to practically tie a lifeline between yourself and your base that you’ll constantly be trekking  back to to restock on pikmin. 33 dudes in this game is not very much, and that’s talking just general use. But what murders the pace even more is when you’ve finally unlocked all 5 pikmin types.

Since you never really know what’s ahead and it takes a lot of time to go back to base, it always makes sense to try to bring a few of each type of dude when you go out so that you can tackle any obstacle. But when it gets to the point you’re trying to split too few guys so many ways, you more often than not don’t have enough of a single type to handle tasks they’re needed for.

Combat and retrieval also suffer as a result of the divided unchanged limit. Simple combat encounters from the beginning get harder as you try evenly distributing your dudes and you have less power to make all out rushes very effective. That tied to the fact that it takes so many guys to carry the bodies back, proportionally to how many you’re working with at least, and like never before you’re faced with making the tough decision between growing your pikmin population by collecting food but forcing yourself to head back to base every 5 minutes, or saving time by not sending dudes back and just continuing to push forward. And I think it's unfair to ask the player that sort of question.

Now, here’s something I try to avoid doing: recommending fixes. You know what would fix this? If pikmin, after carrying food back to base, would return to the captain that issued them. You know why I think this is a fair recommendation? Because the game does this with other shit! Send a pikmin to lay down a bridge and they always come back to where the pieces were. Have a pikmin harvest spicy berries, they go all the way to base and come right back. This feels like, these sorts of tasks had the same issue and they solved it by having the pikmin automatically return. It seems like they just missed another pressure point this could have been relief for.

In the absence of this, a gameplay style that sort of emerged while I was playing was I’d have only 2 captains running around doing the level for real while one was being used as a kind of waiter, running back and forth between the base and the other two captains providing them with the exact number of types of pikmin they needed. Now don’t get me wrong, this was a super fun way to play that I loved developing on my own, but I hated that it left me feeling guilty knowing that really all 3 captain should be doing level progression tasks at once for the best efficiency.

And uh, just saying, this isn’t even a thought that I’d have ever had if it weren’t for a pseudo time limit on my tail. JUST SAYING.

There’s some other shitty side effects of the unchanged limit that you don’t really realize until closer to the endgame that only get worse the longer they linger. So, as their name suggests, pikmin are picked out of the ground, duh. But one of the mechanics is that the longer you leave them in the ground the stronger they are when you finally pluck em. When you’ve already got 100 dudes out in the field though the freaking onion thing stops spitting out seeds. So what happens at this point is you just lose the chance to level up your guys. Thus when you inevitably start screwing up and losing pictomen your calls for backup are all super weak leaf-level dudes who never were allowed to sit in the ground and grow stronger. It’s just, it’s dumb shit that feels like nobody really thought about.

This is a slap on ass, especially when you consider the point I’ve been restarting for 4 videos already, that Pikmin are analogous to health and that the less you have and the weaker they are, the less health you basically have. And I think it makes a lot more sense when you look at it that way here. What’s happening is your health is being split in 3, right? But as those healths deplete and you go back to restock on more, the health you’re getting back is less effective than that which you had. So it’s like, your health bar is emptying but also shrinking, and that’s a shit feeling to have constantly for the simple reason that the number of max pikmin had not been increased to match the new number of captains.

But in this case there’s not much that can be done. There’s no simple fix. An increase to the number of pikmin would bring with it costs to graphics, to ai, to the number of enemies. Those extra pikmin would have to come from somewhere, and as far as those other things go, I mean, visually we’ve already talked about it, this game makes me want to grocery shop it’s so beautiful. AI, it’s the best it’s ever been. Pikmin aren’t clustered anymore, they’re each their own agent and that’s great. And enemies? Holy crap does this game pump em out en masse when it wants to. But it's clear given compromises like in-level loading screens that the game isn’t drawing all these frames and realizing all of these systems without a struggle. So while, yeah, the low number of pikmin gives me things to grumble about, it also gives me things to gush about.

I wanna make special note of this because it’s not necessarily the game’s fault this happens. I think, and I hope, that someday the right hardware will be available as a stage for developers to fully realize the scale Pikmin is meant to have. But until then eesh it’s just taxing on a player to have to handle the shitty end of this stick.

Now, this next bit, it’s something I don’t do often. I’m pretty bad at it in my opinion and that should be pretty clear given how rough this segue is.

In my opinion Pikmin 1 and 2 are two of the best written games ever. I don’t have the type of critical lense necessary to properly explain to you why. I don’t know if it’s maybe just an effect of expectations, of what’s expected being exceedingly different than what’s observed, I mean after all who would imagine that games about walking and talking fucking carrots would have some of the darkest undertones and tackle so openly themes as mature as existential dread and hopelessness.

Pikmin 1 is literally a story about a man accepting his death. He goes through stages of panic, grief, hope and relief and depression. And lest we forget Pikmin 1 has multiple endings so those themes aren’t just sitting on top of the game trying to make a point separate from it, ludonarratively dissonant. No, they’re part of the game, they’re there to motivate you to play the levels efficiently. Olimar writing writing about is family in his journal every night and wondering if he’ll ever see them again served not one but two purposes in alignment with the game’s dynamic endings. It’s there to make you want to perceiver and if you win at the end it gives you joy to see him finally break out of the planet’s atmosphere. But if you loose, the reminder of how much was on the line for this guy makes you feel fucking terrible. Yeah, it might be presented in a way that’s palatable to kids but god damn this is dark dude.

Pikmin 2 is the same sort of way but without a strict time on that life support. Instead the dangers came from the layers upon layers of natural and artificial caves Olimar and Louie needed to explore. One minute it’s all light hearted adventure and discovery, wonder and amazement at the treasures found on this abandoned planet, and the next it’s fucking cosmic horror.

These guys are facing unspeakable alien monsters that sometimes they can put up an offensive against and kill, and sometimes they just fucking can’t. Every item in the game has a set of long-winded descriptions written by Olimar upon discovery and by the AI on the ship as a sales pitch, each trying to understand what it is, what its uses may have been, and what it can tell them about the alien race that left them behind. We the readers of these sometimes clueless but most often characterful messages being members of that extinct alien race, humankind, kinda suggests some things though. I mean, this is a game meant to be played by humans so ultimately the written is done with us in mind. It seems to suggest that we reflect on our existence and the fragility of it. My read is the game is saying that no matter how hard you work and how much of an impact you try to have on your world, positive or negative, it’s all a matter of perspective in the end. Someday even if your traces have survived, the only other left to interpret them might not be able to understand, at all. And that’s one of the saddest and most frustrating things about this fucking existence that we try our best not to think too hard about by distracting ourselves with things like entertainment, like, video games, like this one game, one of my favorites, called Pikmin, which is about, you know it, walking and talking motherfucking carrot people. And I think it’s really impressive that it, of all things, is telling you this.

Like I said, I’m not the right person to talk about writing or themes or any of that bullshit. But look, I’ve played a lot of games, I’ve read… ouf okay let's be honest,… not very many books since high school, and I’ve watched a fair few movies, this one’s my favorite, and I might not be able to tell you exactly how they accomplish this or why they work, but I think about these two game a lot, and for more reasons than just their gameplay.

And that’s why it’s such a major disappointment that Pikmin 3 is… uh, such a major disappointment. I told you I don’t know my ass from my elbow when it comes to writing, holy shit.

Pikmin 3’s main theme, still something very weighty, is the overconsumption of natural resources. The reason I call it a disappointment though is that unlike the previous games which wholly embraced this shit, this one never never takes it seriously.

Part of the problem is that all of that great world-building and subtext done in its prequels through flavorful descriptions and logs can’t be done here as text content has basically been reduced to nothing, comparatively at least.

Instead this time around most of the writing is in the form of dialogue between the 3 captains, but seeing as how all of them boring onenote losers, they don’t have interesting perspectives on their situations and they’re not interesting to hear talk to each other.

Look, 1 and 2, these games had barely any character interaction but their world and characters were defined so well. Look, check this, here’s what I can tell you about Olimar: he’s a curious explorer, he’s a family man, he’s smart and brutally honest, he’s trustworthy and resourceful and empathetic and yet he’s not very courageous at face value, but rather it’s his love for the people in his life and his morals that drive him to perform terribly dangerous acts. The President is, well you guessed it, he’s a greedy businessman type, he’s dishonest to those around him, but ultimately he has hope and he’s responsible, obligating himself to tasks when he knows it's necessary. And Louie? He’s quiet, he’s clumsy and lazy and selfish, and while that might lead you to believe he’s your typical dumb cartoon character, he’s not stupid, not by a long shot. It’s unclear in each game he’s in but there’s something mysterious going on with him.

Now Pikmin 3, keep in mind these are 3 characters who converse with each other constantly, here’s what I’ve got. Alph is the ship’s engineer, he’s nerdy and awkward, he doesn’t pick up on social queues sometimes. Brittney is a botanist, she’s into plants and gross stuff, you know that trope. She’s passive, go with the flow sorta maybe? I don’t know. And Charlie, the captain, he’s a meat-head and a phoney. He’s all braun, no brains. The joke is that he’s the captain for the mission based on credentials and accomplishments that aren’t completely true and everyone else is more fit for their jobs than he is. Literally the only thing he does better than anyone else is fly the ship.

That’s all I’ve got, and what’s more is that these guys don’t reveal their traits slowly as the story progresses or have any sort of arcs at all. They’re all true to their archetypes from the moment you meet them until the end. My point is, for the game to lean so heavily on them to expose its world and issues is a mistake given how uninteresting and bland they are.

It of course doesn’t help that what writing there is isn’t dark at all, falling short of the prequels once again. Even when the situation gets really dire, the writing sticks to that garbage, depthless disney-channel kinda comedy, you know what I’m talking about? It’s like, the writing for once actually matches the presentation of the game, the expectation is met, it feels very much like it’s geared towards a very young audience, and you know what? That would be fine if it weren’t that the gameplay isn’t anything a kid would like!

I can’t imagine a kid playing this, or at least myself as a kid. Given what I remember about being a kid from back when I was one and the sorts of games I did enjoy, I can’t imagine liking or wanting to play anything like this. Look, lets plot a triangle between gameplay, writing and visuals. So long as two of these keep a more general and mature audience in mind the game stays away from being a kids game, the triangle isn’t balanced in that direction so its fine. But this time it goes too far and drops itself in that category I think. And so what you’re left with is a game that’s way too complicated for kids with a presentation and writing that’s insulting to anyone else consuming it.

Of course it's not just the audience that the game’s story screws over but it’s own mechanics are impacted by it in the sense that one in particular, the new hybrid deadline system, is in dissonance with it. See, events that progress the story are all triggered by collecting special items from bosses which eventually leads you to an item that lets you leave the planet and ends the game. Except, what the story is supposed to be about is fruits, it’s supposed to be about collecting all the fruits on the planet. So a speedrun for instance, a perfectly executed fastest playthrough of the game’s missions would satisfy a different goal than its story. Completing the game as quickly as possible would be considered a mission failure, and I don’t think that’s a failure of the game’s structure but rather a failure of its story for not better writing in how the completion of the game actually works. And don’t give me the multiple endings speal, we both know that Pikmin 2 handled this exact sort of completion much better but hosting two endings to two different arcs linearly one after the other, fuck you and everything you stand for if you’re gonna come at me with that weak shit.

I mean, look, the story and game do such a bad job of shaking hands that I didn’t even realize until the end of the game that this mcguffin we were after was preventing us from leaving. They kept talking about it and how we needed to get it, but hell if I knew what for. I had no fucking clue the ship was damaged or anything, it looks all spick and span as far as I could tell. The whole time the stakes were incredibly high but nobody was reminding me of them and I just wanted to pick up some more fruits.

Lemme frame it for you: these guys’ home planet is starving and we’re trapped on an alien world with the last traces of food in the galaxy but I don’t care as much as when I was just one nobody guy in Pikmin 1 trying not to die over a space vacation gone wrong.


And speaking of the ending… ouf, okay. So if there’s anything you’ve heard about Pikmin 3 before this video it’s probably that the ending is an absolute shitshow. I definitely had some memory of it going into this but was still unprepared for what it actually was. The ending of Pikmin 3, in my opinion, is a perfect encapsulation of everything I think is wrong with this game. It is a masterclass in misunderstanding everything that worked about Pikmin The Second. But  when it comes down to it it might not actually be that bad. I’d reason that the sort of person who didn’t like Pikmin 2 would take no issue with this ending, it’d be a fair way to show you to the aisle once the show’s over, and I completely understand that. But ultimately I don’t hold that opinion and this is my video. So all the shit that’s about to fly out of my mouth at whirlwind speeds is going to be coming from whatever place deep down in my gut I’ve stored my love for the second Pikmin game. Please keep that in mind here because yeah this is really tricky stuff to touch and I’ve been really nervous to touch it, it’s why I’ve kept it for the last… that and the fact that it’s the ending of the game and all…

So here’s how the ending plays out. You get to the big oak tree where it turns out Olimar is laying unresponsive in life-support. But weirdly obsessed with him is this strange little gold goop monster. So you pick up his body and the game explains to you that since there’s no direct route back to base for the pikmin carry him along, they’ll instead follow one designated captain of the 3 while you journey further into a cave. As soon as you enter, the goop monster returns but now it’s a enormous blob and it’s chasing you.

So, the challenge of the final area of the game is to use two captain to solve puzzles and clear rooms and build bridges and other paths while the third is constantly being chased by a monster that is obsessively determined to take back Olimar’s body. Of course the time limit is still on, so if the day timer goes out, all the actions done in the cave are saved and the player can, starting from the beginning, pick up Olimar again and get back to where they left off the next day. After what’s likely to be a few days worth of this multitasking chase you make it out of the cave, back to the base of the tree. Here you duke it out with the goop monster one last time through a battle that requires you to use each of the 5 pikmin types at different points, and finally once defeated, Olimar is woken up, he gives you the mcguffin and you blast off to the credits.





Now this might seem like a weird time to specifically draw attention to this again, but you may have noticed that while this series has 3 games in it, this is my fourth video on them. How’s that? Well, Pikmin 2 features one stroke of genius level that I felt deserved it’s own standalone piece and didn’t want to have muddy up the rest of that game’s video. Or at least, that’s what I may have said. Now, I also made that video seperate in anticipation of what would come here. Understanding the Submerged Castle is very important when it comes to receiving Pikmin 3’s ending. See, it’s rarer than rare for one single moment of a game, or any piece of media really, to either make it or break it. And like I said, from a certain point of view or in isolation, the ending of Pikmin 3 doesn’t do either, it’s passable, acceptable. While not being all that exciting it still challenges and tests you like no other level sure, that’s good enough. But given the background, given where it comes from or rather what came before it, its with this knowledge that the ending’s execution becomes so deplorable. Here’s why: Pikmin 3’s ending is just a terrible ripoff of a single level from its prequel.

Now here’s a little recap of the Submerged Castle from Pikmin 2. Before even entering the dungeon you know something’s up. It’s the only cave level in the game whose entrance is below the water level making it so that only one type of pikmin can be brought in. But unexpectedly, the level’s listed elemental requirements include all types, so entry to this stage is already being framed as something special, something unique and challenging, something very mysterious. Then it begins easily enough, it’s your typical treasure hunting fare until a few levels in when the final boss of the dungeon stops by for an early visit. The water wraith is explained to be some sort of extra dimensional being, but as far as you’re concerned he’s threatening enough simply by being impervious to damage, for his speed and unpredictability, and for his ruthless one hit steamroll attack that can absolutely devastate you in the blink of an eye.

It’s unique for being the only final boss, let alone enemy, that antagonizes you throughout an entire dungeon rather than only on its final sublevel. And so so far everything about this dungeon seems to be about setting it apart from the rest. Unlike the others where you can kind of adapt any play style to em, this one leaves you entirely defenseless in the open air and it’s utterly terrifying. So instead you’re forced to use narrow pipes in the walls for your escapes and wait until the wraith gives up and clears the room. You feel like a mouse in a house that doesn’t belong to you, you’re an intruder and sooner or later its rightful owner is going to find you and fucking crush you. The poor visibility and the wraith’s random traversal ai make a great pair when it comes to the sort of hide and seek this dungeon puts you through. When out of its sight, the wraith will wander around the level unpredictably to the point that it can no longer be seen or heard. It’s then when the coast is clear that you can come out and try to continue working on the level. You still have to keep your guard up though because at any moment he can emerge from the darkness and force you back into hiding.

Only at the end are you given the chance to turn the tables on him, and after the fight that’s it. It’s a fantastic level that was unique within its game and only worked for that exact reason and because, as the game had no time limit, it could be as hard as it wanted to be given that you had technically unlimited attempts.


Now, the Formidable Oak, the final level of Pikmin 3, as I mentioned, is kind of a ripoff of the Submerged Castle. On paper it includes everything its predecessor had, but in an effort to adapt it to a game that it couldn’t fairly fit in, in its current state, it makes changes for the worst that transform it from something absolutely fantastic to a total goddamn joke.

First of all, there’s no mystery, there’s no big reveal, there’s no challenging suggestion, there’s none of that. Before even entering the level, you’ve seen the creature called the Plasm Wraith, who’s going to be harassing you while inside. Then literally as soon as you enter, he appears and starts making chase. There’s no rug pulled out from under you, which for the Submerged Castle was half of it. Going in you had no idea what lay inside, but you had just enough information to know that you were unprepared, so when it was revealed exactly what you’d be dealing with and you still had uncertainty about it, that was the moment you’d begin to shit your pants the tension was so great. Here though there’s none of that, it’s like they hand you a rough blueprint of the level’s design before you even walk into it, and what’s worse is that once you’re in, they just hand you the rest of the details!

Once you’re in and goldilocks chugging along after you, the game reveals its behavior to you entirely. It lays out for you exactly the set of coded rules that control the wraith and suggests exactly how to nullify it. The information they give you goes beyond the point of making the final boss predictable to revealing that instead its controllable.

So, the wraith follows Olimar’s body in a straight line, very slowly, and Olimar’s body follows one of your captains at a speed variable depending on the number of pikmin carrying him but easily faster than the wraith. So in essence you’re directing the wraith with your captain. Further, the wraith’s position is always visible to the player via the map on the gamepad screen, it shows up as a big green dot. And even with all this information about the current state and rules of the level, if the player still manages to screw up and let it get too close to them, the captain will issue a generously timed warning notification letting you know they should be moved someplace safer.

Knowing exactly how it works doesn’t just allow you to but basically demands that you totally cheese the wraith’s behavior for the entire level, leading it in circles endlessly once you’ve cleared a loop. The final segment of this game boils down to moving one captain far from the wraith, doing some general level progression tasks with the other two captains until you get a notification, then directing that first captain to autopilot themself somewhere new, and going back to work with the other two. It’s this over and over again. Changing the wraith from something that behaves randomly and moves quicker than your pikmin to something whose paths are just a retreading of yours turns a uniquely terrifying and tense game of cat and mouse into just an annoyance. The wraith has been reduced from an enemy to a crank that you’ve gotta wind back up every half a minute or so whenever it warns you.

Basically what I’m saying is that the wraith from pikmin 2 is a lot like Mr X from Resident Evil 2. It’s invincible, it searches for you, it can be alerted to your presence and hunt after you, and ultimately it makes you rethink navigation throughout a maze-like level. And the wraith from pikmin 3 is more like a shadow Mario from whatever Mario game. It’s just you but with a few seconds lag. It retraces your steps, your jumps and all other actions. It’s basically just you, you control it.

There’s nothing to this, it’s not scary or engaging at all. It’s just a system that you’re asked to be in charge of and given all the information and tools necessary to be.

It’s completely opposite to the feeling I got playing the Submerged Castle in Pikmin 2 which, may I remind you, is not the last level of the game and is not trying to be the final climactic chase sequence, it’s just a one-off break to the formula that can be done whenever and never happens again.

For a long time I couldn't really describe why, but I could identify that Pikmin 3’s ending was just a totally mangled shitty crap version of a single level from its prequel, and in my opinion that was enough to write it off as a bad sequel and a bad game. Okay, I’m not that much of a hard-ass, it also reinstated a time limit system that I didn’t like and removed the unique real-world item treasure hunting that I found so intrinsically motivating and charming too. So, it was less of an instant write-off and more of a slowly growing disrespect for it, but anyways.

t wasn’t until fellow youtube video boi Chariot Rider’s video on how games create tension and some research that it drove me to do, that I really understood why I read the ending of Pikmin 3 the way I did.

In his video, he practically gives a formula or a recipe for how tension can be made in a game, and the more he described it in contrast to methods of removing tension the more I realized he was basically describing exactly why the Submerged Castle works and exactly why the Formidable Oak doesn’t. God Bless this man for uploading his video when he did or I would not have reached this thesis.

And the reason the Oak doesn’t work, that’s because while Pikmin 2 and in particular that one level are extraordinarily good at managing tension, Pikmin 3 and in particular that one level remove and add just the right sets of features to, rather than eliminate that tension entirely, turn it into something else. Something that has a name, something called stress. Judging this series and this game now through the lense of tension vs stress has given me a whole different way to talk about it, think about it and reason about it. Major thanks to Chariot Rider again for helping me understand why I love one of my favorite games so much and why I’m so disappointed in its follow-up. If y’all don’t mind definitely check the man out. If you do, tell him dad sent you. The joke is that I’m not his dad.


So let's talk about what makes tension and stress different beasts. In the context of video games which is what we’ve all gathered here today for, tension is a sort of pressure that can be managed by the game whereas stress is more of a personal feeling that the game may induce but it can’t really control or stop without plan turning itself off. Stress is an anxiety you have to deal with personally while tension is an attribute, a property of a game’s state almost, that can be cranked up and down by the level designers. One way to look at it, if I’ve got this right, is that players of equal skill levels should experience the same tension when playing the same part of the same game, however the stress they feel or whether or not they feel any at all is entirely personal, it comes from what makes them as individuals fearful and anxious.

Now it should go without saying that the average person finds multitasking to be stressful and fatiguing. I am certainly one of those people. I prefer more to plan things properly and to get them done ahead of time than to be overwhelmed all at once under time pressure I didn’t ask for. This exact environment causes me some real mental strain when playing the game that Pikmin 3 asks me to play. It’s an environment that’s caused me real mental strain in the past in real life, at my first software development job that I quit, partly as a result of that. So for a video game, a piece of entertainment you pay money for, to elicit the same feelings as the toll of a job’s final weeks, mmmm that seems like the wrong direction to be going. It’s like the joke goes: in only 2 weeks of development you can save yourself two hours of planning, or worst case 3 months of finding a replacement, you know? Look, it’s not that I can’t handle pressure, it’s just that I get upset when nobody takes the appropriate effort to mitigate it and disallows me from trying also. Some people love working under pressure, and you know what? I’m sure those sortsa folks would love Pikmin 3. Where am I going with this? I don’t fucking know.


Having two captains but only one playable at a time, that’s tension. It causes you to play cautiously and sparingly. That tension, it becomes relieved once you’ve methodically cleared a level of a dungeon or an area in the overworld. It’s tense because there’s uncertainty about your safety as you can only control one captain at a time, dropping off one in order to control the other is a gamble every time, and the game bites you in the ass enough times with unexpected traps to make you question everything.

Having three captains, or should I say CRAPTONS, that you’re asked control and manage simultaneously in parallel though, that’s different, it’s not tense, it’s a stress. It’s a lot, it’s painful, it’s annoying, and aside from just becoming more familiar with the system as time goes on through practice, its a stress that never gets relieved. You don’t get to enter and re-emerge from places that apply the stress like in the second game, it’s just always there, it never goes away You have to deal with it yourself personally. You’re constantly switching captains, touching the touch screen, plotting paths, counting pikmin, switching captains, plotting new paths, you’re just always on. You never have a moment to just stop, take in your surroundings and re-calibrate. And if anything it all gets worse and worse as the game’s overworld gets more demanding and starts handing you more and more types of pikmin but doesn’t give you more space to hold them.

Christ I’ll give it that, Pikmin 2 may have been poisonous in terms of, well, relying really heavily on poisonous pikmin that you couldn’t acquire normally, but at least having such a low population of them meant you didn’t have these sorts of stresses hitting you.

Having a hard 30 day time-limit, that’s tension. It’s something you can see, something have some information about, something that gets exciting and tighter as it ticks down and you press on to get all the pieces of the ship in time. The timer is something that comes in and out of relevance as you discover new areas and new items. Similarly, having dungeons with unlimited time but limited numbers of pikmin, that’s tense too, in the exact opposite way.

Tension is kind of like a question being being asked that you can’t completely answer but can think about. The time limit asks “how much can you get done in a certain amount of time only?”, a dungeon asks “how much can you get done with a certain amount of pikmin only?”. There’s so much uncertainty about what lies below, what sorts of enemies will be present, what sorts of traps will be laid out, how the rooms will be procedurally plotted, which pikmin types will be needed for which puzzles, how many sublevels there’ll be, what the boss enemy at the end will be, whether or not there’s a surprise mini-boss lurking in wait, what sorts of items will be gathered, ouf. The only things you know for certain are how many pikmin you’ve started with and that you can’t get more while inside. That’s it. This is a tension that gets cranked higher and higher the further you go and the more pikmin you loose, the more you question whether or not you’ll have enough to continue on. And then BANG, it’s all released in one shot at the end of a final boss fight, it’s cathartic, you reset. Up the water shoot back to the overworld, from 100 back to 0 tension. It’s a phenomenon.

Reinstating a time limit but putting you in charge of it though? That’s stressful. The question is now “how much can you do in... how much time?” The question becomes two and it’s circularly dependant on its own answer which you have to give. The game is asking you a question that forces you to ask yourself a question. Even though technically an average player should be able to quickly build a buffer of over 30 days by the halfway point, it’s the fact that you are now directly responsible for managing your own time limit rather than it just being a big clock up on the wall, it’s that difference in execution that makes you perceive it and receive it differently. In the first game the uncertainty lied in how long it would take to gather all the ship parts and if that amount of time was less than, equal to, or greater than 30 days. In this game there is no uncertainty, no tension being wound by the game. The clock isn’t a clock, it’s a shelf full of juice. You drink one bottle of juice a day. How does the juice get on the shelf? It gets there when YOU collect fruits and turn them to juice. YOU are at the root of issue, and although its functionally the same as a timer ticking down, increasing the juice buffer is your responsibility. It’s a lot to think about, to have on your mind at all time, and it’s stressful.

And now with this new way of reasoning about the game, holy hell does the ending come out terrible.

Like we said, the Submerged Castle, just like every other dungeon in the second game, manages tension by slowly cranking it to the max all the way until the end. First you enter knowingly unprepared, that’s a crank. Then the wraith appears, that’s a crank. You observe that his behavior is random, that means that even when he’s left a room the tension lingers as he can return any second without warning. In fact it’s even more tense because at least when he’s in the same room as you you can keep an eye on him, but when he’s gone you know that the feeling of safety you’re convincing yourself of is fake. When he’s not in the same room as you, he can be anywhere. That’s uncertainty with limited details, that’s tension. Eventually you learn about how to take over control of bulbmin enemies, that’s a bit of relief, but uh oh! Now here’s a level with no clear hiding spaces, and a level with bombs, and a level with traps, that’s scary… and so on and so forth. Until of course you get to the end the game finally reveals to you how to make the wraith vulnerable but also lets you know that defeating it won’t be a cake walk and that if you screw up, you can get yourself deadlocked. The tension is cranked to the max now until finally, BOOM! The wraith is made completely vulnerable and the tension is released as the cat becomes the mouse and you throw everything you’ve got at him for a swift victory, revenge for antagonizing you the whole. The scales are re-balanced. The tension is relieved.


Formidable Oak on the other hand eliminates all uncertainty by showing you the wraith’s exact position at all times, removing the randomness in its behavior and explaining exactly how it traverses the cavern to the point that it effectively asks you to just manage the final boss, yourself. And manage in the sense that you, you literally have control over it. You guide it, you take it for a walk, you lead it around. It never leaves the room, it never changes the formula, and even if it did it wouldn’t matter because you’ve got a big green dot on your map letting you know where it is. This is a stress, it’s just another thing you’re asked to be on top of that isn’t a real threat.

This has tension from its uncertainty. There are questions to be asked about how this guy works and you may not be able to answer them. This doesn’t have tension and only leaves you with the stress of controlling yourself and your own challenger at the same time like a snake having to worry about its own tail.

It’s like, you’re gonna hate for this, but it’s like when you’re reminded to think to breathe. Normally it’s something that, yeah sure if you don’t do it you’ll die, but it’s so easy to do that there’s no real threat. It’s just something else to worry about, just something else to multi-task. It’s nothing special.

So because no tension exists throughout this entire encounter, because there’s so much information provided to you that there’s left not a single question anyone could ask you about the game’s state that you couldn’t answer, no tension is relieved by beating the boss at the end of the road… or the base of the tree I should say. You’re not invested in this shit enough. And the game seems to know that, putting your pikmin base walking distance from the neatly cut out arena so that you can just leave in the middle of the fight to restock and come back, basically removing all challenge. They straight put an unlimited health supply right next to the boss fight, holy hell man.

And then you beat it, again, feeling 0 relief from 0 tension that was never developed, and boom, within like a minute you’re watching the credits. It feels weirdly rushed. Not that you need a second to catch your breath seeing as how all of this has just been personally stressful garbage you’re trying to get out of the way, but it’s weird how quickly the game ushers you out and how impactless it all feels. It’s like “yup, here’s the ending, bye!”


Pikmin 3 inherits all of these great systems and ideas from the previous game, but in execution, by overloading the player with information and details, things to keep track of and control and manage, it shows that it doesn’t understand that what made Pikmin 2 work was all the information you didn’t have.



The nail in the coffin for me on this point was the mission mode I mentioned before. Finding this after having experience the ending of the game proved to me how little it understood the shoulders it was standing on. So uh, by the way sorry for only recording one level of a mode I literally couldn’t stand after two whole days of doing nothing but playing and recording gigabytes of footage of this fucking game, fucking sue me you’re gonna be watching the same level whole time I speil on about this.

The missions are split down into 3 types, find treasures, fight enemies, and boss fights. So what’re we gonna do? You guessed it! We’re gonna bring back Pikmin 2. In this game the dungeons were all 3 of these things at once. In Pikmin 2, finding treasure, fighting enemies, and defeating bosses were subgoals of a single level’s completion, they weren’t so segregated, in fact they were intertwined!

Separating them all from one another in this game, each one, it becomes void of tension because only together do the really ask the player any sorts of questions. Treasure hunting is only tense when sleeping enemies block the path. Fighting enemies is only tense because if you perform poorly and loose too many pikmin, you may not have enough left to be able to carry treasures. And of course boss fights, the ultimate conclusions to each level, are only tense because prior to entering the final sublayer the player has already been smashed and passed through an intense gauntlet of that aforementioned treasure hunting and enemy fighting, and if they fail here they’ll have to restart the whole thing.

Pikmin 3, why would I fight monsters unless there were treasures behind them? Why would I be interested in collecting treasures if I’m doing it in an otherwise empty world? And how could defeating a boss feel rewarding if I’m able to skip all of the challenges that precede them?

Guys, they took 3 different parts of what was originally a survival mode, made them each their own mission type, and finally slapped a timer on em to call it a day. It completely misses the challenge of Pikmin 2’s dungeons. Like everything else in this game, the framework is there, it’s just what’s built inside of it that’s no good. And then of the all of the fucking things to decide to monetize, make some of their first first-party paid dlc on their new online shop service, they chose these. The verdict? Look, I won’t tell you not to buy Pikmin 3, it sits atop of stack of the pikmin for better and for worse. But what I will tell you is not to buy these mission levels. This makes no sense. That’s all.


Pikmin is series I hold very close to my heart. A friend of mine recommended me the remake of the first game on the Wii in highschool and I fell in love with it’s gameplay and unique approach to telling an unexpected story. Then Pikmin 2 for the Wii, that was harder to track down a copy of for me. But eventually I did and my on-and-off playthrough of it lasted me about a quarter of a year in college. I never even beat the game after all that time, only finally doing it years later for a video, and even at that technically I didn’t finish it because I completed the last dungeon and the final boss with 1 too little pikmin to carry the last 4 treasures in the game. My playthroughs of these are something I cherish, something I remember.

Pikmin 3, with seemingly so much purpose, celebrates what are, in my opinion, the weakest parts of both its prequels in the vain of progress while simultaneously going out of its way to demonstrate the capabilities and uses of a new console gimmick and mode of interaction and display that, in my opinion, are a detriment to the game. In other words, it’s trying to evolve in what I think is the wrong direction while it’s also trying to showcase a fancy new secondary display built for overwhelming a user with additional information and a sense of omnipresence in a game that in my opinion works best when you don’t have all the answers.

Where do things go from here? Well, a fourth pikmin game, not the shitty ds one, has been confirmed to have been in development for quite a few years, even rumored to have been close to release once. I can only imagine that the story for that game will mirror this one and I can only hope that all this delay is not just for the sake of porting game to the new hot console on the block, but also is the result of some sort of retrospective, a postmortem like they did for the last games. Selfishly, I hope that a fourth Pikmin game steers clear of the third, and given how some of the other popular Nintendo ips have had their design modified to better suit the hybrid home and portable console that is the Switch, it only makes sense to me that it would have to.

Look maybe this is a little bit personal and I don’t know if this is something I should really end this video on. But uh, but I always felt that media related tattoos were kinda fucking dumb. But then I worked for over a year in media and entertainment and a lot of people I met had made that commitment, they wore their fandoms on their sleeves, and their arms and their thighs. And so I realized that being so invested in entertainment as many of us are, you know, people who make and watch sometimes hour long videos about videogames on the internet, it’s not just about fandom of individual things, you know? It’s kind of a lifestyle. And so that’s what marking yourself with anything like that is really about. And so I’ve thought for a long time about, you know, if I were to get some media related tattoo on my ass or something, pretty big canvas, but if I were, what would it be? I’ve had falling outs with a lot of the entertainment I used to like when I was a kid. I used to love metal gear solid but now I’ve almost come to disrespect it, I have completely different views on some of those games than I used to have. Maybe splatoon? I mean I like it a lot but I was in university when it came out, you know it wasn’t a part of my formative years.

Fuck, I used to be super into metal in high school, and now I literally just listen to fucking soundcloud mashups. Like the fuck?

And then I realized that Pikmin is kind of the last thing, like, that that I’ve got. I loved and still do love the first and second games, and you know what I can forgive the 3 third game for being a pile of shit, it was on a weird console. So right now whether or not I get a little spaceship drawn flying out of my lopsided asscrack is dependent on how that fourth game turns out. One rotten egg in the series I can put up with, but if we got two, nah man.


In conclusion, my name has been LambHoot and I hope you shove a carrot right up where you poop. Thanks for watching.



Hello again, right before I cut to the usual endscreen bit, I need to make a special announcement. You see, in between the start of production of this video and, uh, you know, like, actually finishing it now, um, something happened that I need to discuss. Some friends and I have gotten together and in partnership we’ve kind of, well in partnership, basically Veegie kinda did most of it, you know. But anyways. Long story short, we have launched a sort of goofy freaking website, I guess it’s kind of, there’s a content side to it and there’s a forum. I’ve never really participated in a web forum before, but I don’t know, I kinda have for this one and I’m, it’s pretty dope. But anyways. It’s called last-life.net and you can check it out right now. We post all of our content there. You can discuss it. There are different boards for different topics. And so far it's a lot of fun. I think my favorite thing about it is that it kinda reveals maybe a, an unintentionally well kept secret, um, that we’ve had for a long time which is that a lot of the people you may or may not watch online who make similar content, you know, these video essays about video games and stuff, a lot of us kind of know each other and have known each other and we’ve regularly spoken to each other and met with each other on various occasions. Like, you know a lot of the people you watch are probably already friends, and this, I think what excites me most about this is that it kind of reveals to a lot of people that, like, yeah, we all know each other. Like, that’s, so far out of all the reactions to this, that’s kind of my favorite, so, I don’t know. THat just really excites me. Anyways, hope you guys give it a check out. I’m gonna posting content there obviously, and uh, I’ll be active in those forums, it’s gonna be a good time. So, uh, yeah. Now I’m gonna cut to my regular endscreen pre all of this. Alright, see you guys.












Hello everybody and welcome to the endscreen! Haven't done that in a while. I can't scream anymore in my new apartment. I still feel like end screens aren't really like, they don't work with, I've definitely evolved a lot over the past little while. I still like doing the end screens but I think the thing that's killing them that most is the fact that now I caption my videos and the rest of it. Most of my video is scripted so it's really easy to just do a final polish pass and make sure that everything's good. But the end screen, I straight have to, I have to take this, I have to play it at a quarter time speed and I have to write as it's playing. I hate, like I'm doing this right now as I'm editing this video I know and I'm hating myself, in the past, in the future it's complicated. But yes here we are joining you from my bathroom studio where I record all of my videos because hey! They're all shit. First order of business, I just want to fucking not look like a fatass, but uh.



First order of business. Just want to again give a shout out, please send some attention, some love to my boy ChariotRider who has straight up been droppin some of the hottest videos recently and it was really like, I don't know man, it's like. I feel like I watch a lot of people who make videos about video games and stuff and a lot of times I watch a video and I'm like oh I can't wait to watch this, I watch it, I'm like I didn't remember anything they said. Maybe like the fault is on me for being a crappy audience member, and I have a lot I'm thinking about, but I don't know man. Like so there's something about this guy, he came just, like I straight up, I was listening to him at work in the background and he started talking and I was getting distracted from what I was working on, I was like okay I need to stop and to watch this over lunch. And then I did and I was like, oh my god, and he got me out of this rut I was having writing the Pikmin video. It was really kind of amazing. I'm gonna turn the microphone. Anyways, yeah so please send him some, send him some good vibes. Go check out, his, his video about tension. I highly recommend. I don't know if he has anything newer by the time this comes out. He probably does. But definitely recommend that. Also, I didn't know if I wanted to do this in the beginning of the video or not, but I had already had some disclaimers. I kind of wanted to do a little bit of a hello, maybe make this an opportunity to say, first of all thank you to - well. Okay here's what I want to do. I want to I want to get two things of the way, I want to make an addressing, and I want to do a thank, but I don't know which order, so I'm going to address first. Hello everybody, there are many more people who may be watching this video, or not, I'm not really sure yet. It's not out. But I am aware that there are many more of you. Welcome. This is typically the sort of thing I do. I do a long video and then I do this little end screen at the end where, you know, I get out some updates or some whatever. People seem to like it I guess. And this is where I can do, you know, special things that I can't really get out in a regular video like, thank my dad who clearly watched my one of my videos for once and then directed a bunch of people to me, causeI don't know I start getting a comment saying your dad sent to you. I was like wow, I called my dad I was like hey... Turned out it was my real dad, Hamish Black. I actually don't really know what to say because, the thing is. And this how fucking stupid I look, I have the biggest fucking smile on my face but like. I don't know, the thing about this last time that the Hamish gave some shoutouts again, and I appeared in this list, is that for some reason it drove people to come, to come check out my thing. But also a lot of people started, like actually watching my videos. And I don't know I, and a lot of the attention I got for once was not, because for some reason I always balances out, like, as soon as I start getting attention in one sector, the spongebob stuff starts kicking up. But what I've noticed recently is that my spongebob videos are actually getting less attention, and my more recent things like, especially my Metal Gear Solid video, my few years old now, but my Five Nights at Freddy's video, and my Metal Gear Solid V... did I say five before? I meant Peace Walker. But like, I have like, real videos about real - Pikmin 2  for some reason is like, like I mean, blowing up, blowing up on my scale. But like, people are listening to what I have to say about them, and they're discussing and I'm getting comments and I'm getting attention. I don't know man.

Look like I said in that video man Hamish is like, a truck picking up these leaves, but the thing is that it's, maybe the mistake I made is that it's not just leaves he's dropping, like, he's really like, he has this inner circle you know? And he opens it up and, he's like “hello join it” and he engulfs you, and then. He's not just piling leaves on top of you, he's... I don't know. I’ve been given a lot of hope recently. Let's just leave it at that. I have some other stuff I want to talk about today. Thank you Hamish, goddamnit.

Um oh so here's something I was thinking about, I’ve been thinking about it for this week. I don't know, it might, I might sleep over the weekend and then not even think this is a cool idea anymore but. Over the, over the holidays, I have this old Raspberry Pi, I did one little project with it and then I just kind of threw it in a drawer and ever done anything else with it. And then I have this, this uh, ai bot that some of you guys may have remembered from the old discord server and Twitter, named ace Nickelback, who posts some fire fucking takes. And I was thinking, you know be great? Is finally put a Ace Nickelback on, on, on my raspberry pi instead of having him on the laptop that is sitting on the toilet. But it thought that be a cool idea and then I thought over the holidays, because I'll have a week off from work, I should do that. So I ordered a new keyboard for my Raspberry Pi, I ordered a mouse, and was like I'm gonna just like I'm gonna, I'm gonna, do some crazy stuff. Then the holidays came and went and I got really really busy and I was like, wow that sucks. And, in school I always found time, I mean, in school mostly I didn't make too many videos, but I, I had a lot of fun, chances to do little fun programming projects on the side like Ace Nickelback for instance. And now that I'm working full time, yeah, you know, I program at work all the time, and then I come home and I make videos, but sometimes I, I have an idea for something a little bit technical and I want to do it. Like last Christmas I wanted to make a, like, I wanted to just make a game in Unity, or like not even a game, but just a system in Unity where you had sprites from different angles, and depending on  your rotation around an object of that type, it would load the correct sprite. Basically like, like literally how it, like I used the Mario kart sprites, like how it works in like mario kart 64 when you travel around a character like, different sprites load for the different angles of the car . And I just rebuilt that. I had sprites of Mario in a cart and I was just, I was sitting in bed one day, and I was like I want to do this. And I spent a day and I did it. And like that was so much fun. But these days I feel like if I'm not, if I'm not at work and I'm not spending time working on a video, I'm wasting my time. And I feel like that kind of sucks. Because I want to share a lot of myself with, because, I mean, from time to time I'll stream right? And it's always a good time. So anyways, 
all that to say, what I thought about today was that, recently one of my projects I’ve thought about because, I don't think it's gonna be so easy to put Ace the pie, but what I was thinking is, I think I would like to rebuild a Ace Nickelback  from scratch in Java. It's currently in c#. And I'm thinking what I might do, might be a little bit complicated, but what I might try to do, is maybe, because ultimately when I do live stream I basically, I stop playing the game. We end up just talking, chat is going while wild, but we're, we just we have a conversation. Everybody just starts talking and I end up just talking the whole time. So I was thinking, I could do something, you know, less active and talk and do stuff at the same time so I was thinking of maybe semi-regularly streaming while I reprogram a Ace Nickelback in Java. I don't know if that's interesting to anybody. Basically the idea is I would just turn on my screen and start coding and just play around. Probably have the old project versus the new project and slowly but surely hopefully rebuild him and then see what I want to do with him. And then of course have, you know, you guys around if you like. It might be pretty boring but, I don't know. Tell me what you think. Is that something that would interest you guys? I've thought before about doing little, like, programming tutorials, but I think those would take too much time. But I think this is a better way to do it. Like livestream it and maybe just have some fun? I don't know. If that's something that interests you, if you're if you're someone who is of a programming, computer science, background and that's interesting, let me know. And if you're not, give me that perspective too. If you've never really thought about this stuff you're not really into the programming or software or anything, what do you think of something like that? Would you stick around for that? Let me know. I'm just throwing ideas at these four walls. 

That's like the saddest thing about becoming an adult, because the other thing I, the other thing I wanted to do this, well, last year, last year I told myself, last year, the last year was gonna be the year I got back into reading. I got one book, I started it like a few weeks ago, I started it before the year was over but like, just a few days before New Year's . It’s a book on Greek mythology, I was all... and it wasn't it was before God of War came out so don't even fucking start with the shit. But it was like I just like you know what? I'd like to read a little bit about this because part of this is my heritage. To be fair I did, I started taking Greek courses on Saturdays, so that kind of took some of the time that maybe I would have been, I would have spent a reading. But um languages are hard. But so I mean okay, you know what? I can't really blame myself because basically what I was on this like, heritage searching journey. And instead of, I bought a book because I thought I was gonna read it, and instead of reading it I ended up taking courses which are probably show a bigger commitment. So maybe the way I'm looking at myself like I'm an idiot who couldn't commit to doing something, but really I committed to something else that was more valuable. So basically I made the right decision, so I don't know maybe I'm proud of myself I guess, you know? I'll give myself some credit, slap on the back. That wasn't a slap on the back, it was my shoulders cause this shirt is too tight to OW. I can clap with one hand, have you ever seen this? Have I ever shown this? Look at this. I can even to do with two hands. I know you're impressed. Listen, I know you're thinking Hamish. I know what you're thinking. Sadly I'm taken. Taken to the to the jail because I'm a criminal! Fucking, so yeah. Uh Pikmin 3, that was it, that was the end of this series that I started... whoo... many times ago. Aaaye what comes around goes around. There’s gonna be sources in the description, there's a couple, of I actually you know? Fuck you guys! I actually read quite a bit about tension and stress! I might be there are certain there are certain readings I did


“Yeah like who the fuck is LambHoot though?”

[coughing]

I’m sick. I’m sick AND tired of Resident Evil 7 and the way I’ve heard a peeps talk about it.

So, my sister got it for me at launch but as the past year has been a bit hectic for me, what with moving twice and all, only recently was I reunited with my Playstation 4 at my new apartment.

Which I’m recording in the bathroom of because the previous tenant um, failed, to uh, tell me, even after I asked, which is what I believe you call a lie, when I asked about whether or not the neighbors were very noisy. And as you can imagine, my neighbor right now is watching television very loud and she does this every day...

 Up until the last week I had a minimum amount of exposure to the game, all I saw were some very positive tweets, and since playing it I promised myself not to watch anyone else’s videos but caved and watched BunnyHop’s and the GamingBrit’s, particularly important was the later as after dropping my Resident Evil 6 video I saw his and it turned out I basically retreaded the same ground in the same way as him, albeit more thoroughly, but it made me feel kind of like an idiot.

This time though I’ve got a bit of a different sentiment.

Being sick and tired of a game is different than hating it. I’m not saying I think RE7 is trash, I’m just saying I found it really, [coughing] really, oh god, [throat clearing] really boring. Mmm.

This whole gimmick of me actually being sick while recording this is definitely a mistake, but I don’t… [laughing that turns into coughing], I don’t even care.


Listen, christ, I’m playing this thing and sometimes it feels like, c’mon, I can’t be the only person seeing these things right?

Like, here we go into this, the premise they’re throwing is that you’ll be mostly defenseless throughout the game and will be sneaking around the house hiding from the family. But, like, correct me if I’m wrong but like… there’s only three parts in the whole game where they do this.

For context, I played on normal mode so I don’t know if this changes for hard, but honestly I don’t care. I picked the hardest option possible for a first playthrough and was only in this sort of situation that the game was selling down everyone’s throat three times!

There was the part at the beginning of the game after dinner where the dad chases you around, then the part where the dad chases you down the hallways upstairs near the main hall and you realize that, disappointingly, he doesn’t roam the whole house and only patrols small sections. So like, once you go down this staircase, you’re basically completely safe. And then finally, the last one is where you sneak around the mother in the second freaking soggy house, which you actually do twice, once as the girl in the cassette tape, and once as the dude in the real story. But like, it’s the same space, it’s the same thing. So technically this happens 4 times but there are only 3 very small locations in the game where sneaking around is what you’re doing. Everywhere else you’re totally safe from the family members. Like… I’m not the only dumbass who’s seeing this right? How could anybody be cool with this?

And it’s not even like they’re that much fun anyways. Like, the people run just about as fast as you, so if you get spotted just running away and hiding behind a corner, an expected strat, it doesn’t work. Trying this will just end with you getting hit, and then once that happens you run slower and then it’s just a matter of time before your pursuer takes you out. [coughing] No, once you get spotted, the only 100% guaranteed way to lose your tail is to pop a shot at their invincible freaking face to stun them, then use that lead to bounce and deek em out. But that’s a waste of a bullet. Unless you care about your high score at the end, which you shouldn’t, this is Resident Evil 7, then in most cases when you’re spotted it’s more affordable to just let them kill you so you can restart and try again without spending that bullet. It’s not very fun and it’s certainly not scary.

Here’s a bit of a thought. I think that for horror games to work, for them to really sell that fear to you, all horror related mechanics and systems need to be abstracted in such a way that a player can’t break them down or analyze them as one, as a mechanic or a system. Like, there’s a difference between a monster coming to kill you and a computer game AI with a field of view and a simple pathfinding algorithm. Seeing the limits and requirements of this system gives you a peek under this guy’s hood, it reveals the mystery and now he’s not scary anymore. Gamer mode kicks in and you start thinking of him less as a foe and more as a possible obstruction to optimize your behavior for.

In interacting with them, the 2 family members in RE7 which chase you in 3 locations stop being scary to you, the player, for the same reason that you, the player, would do things like not reload your guns in Resident Evil 4 and take advantage of the capacity increase upgrades to mooch free bullets out of the merchant. Difference is RE7 is using this cheeseable system to try to convince you to be afraid, and hey, [cough] I’m not convinced. There was no panic or fear in me, just boredom.




AND SPEAKING OF BOREDOM, not that this is the overarching theme of this whole video anyways, but holy hell these boss fights. Again, same sort of stuff where if you get hit it’s worth it just to die and try again sometimes, especially for the first fight since if you get hit you’re almost promised a quick death because of how fast this dude walks and because of how slow you are and how narrow your view is. What sucks is that playing the game correctly means you’ll be watching a lot of the same cutscenes over and over again… ouf. But then all of the other boss fights kind of break every rule of what makes a good boss fight.

[coughing fit] I’m gonna die, I’m gonna die in this bathroom.

Like, again, correct me if I’m wrong… but most of them don’t have any sort of phases, and the ones that do are poorly handled.

So one of my least favorite parts of the game was this fight in the dissection room with the dad. Technically this fight has two phases, so first he just kind of paces around you waaaay too quickly and you want to blast a few shotty rounds at his dumb head. Eventually he gets mad, tears this fence open and picks up these… motorized scissors? I don’t know… but he also makes accessible a chainsaw for you. So now the two of you are fighting, still in this small room, and like, all you do is the same crap until the end. He’s got two attacks, a single strike and a sequence of them, and like, maaaaaaybe as the fight goes on he starts using the more aggressive one more often, but as far as you’re concerned it’s just the same crap. You kick the bodies to distract him, drive the chainsaw into him. If he strikes you, you block to reduce damage. If the chainsaw turns off, turn it back on, and from time to time the game gives you this chance to cut him open and reveal a weakness or something, and like, that’s it… I thought maybe this was gonna be a classic “3 times you’re dead” sort of boss fight where, where each opportunity to saw him open would mark one of three phases of the fight, giving him more abilities and whatever, but no. It’s just the same crap, a big chainsaw brawl in the basement of the house for like 5-10 minutes until he’s just dead. Like, I don’t feel accomplished. Sure, I learned how to beat him on my own, but I did that like 10 minutes ago and the time between now and then has just been me repeatedly following through on that. That’s kind of garbo.

And I’m skipping a boss here, but this is the same for his final final form that you fight a few hours later, this big goop monster. Here there isn’t even a first pseudo phase before you get a chainsaw or anything. Here you just go in, you see his body full of eyeballs, you evade his attacks and shoot them, and that’s it, you win. If anything, this fight does the opposite of what a good one should do, because as you remove his eyes he has a harder time getting you because you know, he’s losing eyes. Like, this sort of degeneration of the boss’ abilities and strength works in games where you’re fighting other dudes, or games where you’re hunting monsters or breaking down robots, but this is a giant goop monster and I’m just some dude. Aside from that, the only interesting part of this boss is that he has some eyes underneath him which you can really only pop if you manage to stay on the basement level while he’s above you… or you can just use the grenade launcher and destroy those eyes without ever even realizing they were there to begin with. It just… [coughing] it doesn’t feel right.

I mean, take a look back at old modern Resident Evil goop monster designs. Goop monsters are pretty popular in the series past, and you know why that is? Because goop isn’t held back by form. The whole point of a goop monster, if you allow me to just make this conclusion, is that it can turn into all sorts of different kinds of things, its forms and phases and variants are endless. I walk into this fight and I’m thinking the ouroboros parasite that you fight various different ways in RE5, I’m thinking the chapter-long final boss of the Leon campaign in RE6, I’m looking this dude in all his eyes thinking HOOOOLY CRAP what is this dude about to turn into. The floor is water right? I bet I’m gonna have to electrocute his dumbass or something, or he’s gonna morph into the walls or some crap… but no… you just, you just shoot all his eyes and he dies.


And then there’s my least favorite boss in this game, the one that kind of made me want to stop playing honestly. The mother you fight twice. The first time you fall into a hole and it just like a dumb shooting gallery sort of situation… probably prep for the final boss who also immobilizes you and is exactly the same crap… but her second phase is the bs one.

She’s obsessed with bugs, so one way or another she winds up with a hornet nest down in her undercarriage. I don’t know what kind a STD that is or what bug she had to sleep with to contract it, but what I do know is that the treatment is a lot of bullets applied directly to the infected area at about 28 hundred miles per hour. How many bullets? Turns out, more than I actually had!

So just like most of the other fights in the game, this boss fight has no phases either. You’re stuck in the greenhouse with her. She has very few behaviors to exhibit. She can walk around slowly, revealing her weakness. She can crawl along the walls and ceiling and drop down to smack you around. And finally she can run away from you and birth wasps and wasp nests to back her up. A little like the other fight, she seems to use her most aggressive crawling behavior more often towards the end which makes it hard to administer her treatment, but throughout the fight she doesn’t pull any new tricks out of her sleeve. What you learn about her and what she can do in the first 2 minutes of a fight are all you need to know for the remainder of the 20 minute to half hour freaking battle! Christ, this fight is insultingly long. Dude, I get to play this game for like 1 to 2 hours max per night after work and a bit on weekends if I’ve got the time. Imagine spending potentially half your time in this fight just to die and have to try again. I’m not complaining just about the length of the fight, to be honest I’d have been fine with this if the fight had more variables, but it doesn’t. It’s bland as heck. It took me two days to beat her, just enough for me to consider that maybe there was a trick and simply shooting her where the sun didn’t shine wasn’t the ticket. But no, that was the ticket, and I just had to endure it.

And wouldn’t you know, the time I actually did it, which I didn’t record but will see if I can recreate, boi I ran completely out of ammo. I went in there with a handgun, a shotgun and the flamethrower. The only gun I had but didn’t take was the grenade launcher because I didn’t have enough ammo to make it worth the inventory space, which was very much needed as the greenhouse has tons of resources to scavenge during quiet parts [cough] of the fight.

I used the guns exclusively on her weakspot and used the flamethrower exclusively on bugs, both the ones she sent after me and the ones blocking storage cabinets with more ammo. I was really good on health too, only needing 2 refills for the whole fight. That all went down the shitter when I officially ran out of [cough] bullets [throat clear] and exhausted all munitions given to me in the actual building. At this point I was at least 15 minutes in and had to resort to the flame thrower to damage her. Unlike bullets though, it had no stopping power and also blocked my visibility while firing, which was kinda shit. And I knew that if I ran out I’d be totally defenseless against the bugs she could send after me… and so of course when I did finally run out, I had a really important realization:

Not only have I just wasted all my ammo, but I’ve also just wasted almost a half an hour of my life. The risk of losing this and having to restart is high, but I have try something, even if it puts me in danger. 

So I took a good look at my surroundings, sized up my opponent one last time, realized she had just laid a new spawn of bugs and that I would die from their stings in the next 60 or so seconds anyways, pulled out my switch blade and said “fuck it”, and yeah, I went after this gross mutated monster lady with a pocket knife, and I swiped and swiped and swiped and I freaking beat her by the grit of my teeth. And when it was over, did I feel accomplished? Did I feel like I overcame something? No, I didn’t. I felt cheated, abused, insulted and bored. It was a boring boss fight. It was the same thing over and over and over again until I had run completely out of resources and by some miracle managed to avoid her wasps long enough to shank her. Up until the last few seconds it was just “shoot her nest, burn the bees, dodge her swipes, shoot her nest, burn the bees, dodge her swipes” for WAAAAAAAY too long to be enjoyable. It wasn’t fun as it had no variety and was overly drawn out, it wasn’t scary as in the first minutes I was able to get a complete understanding of her behavior, and it wasn’t rewarding because I wasn’t asked to overcome some challenge, I was asked to set an alarm for half an hour and wake up when it was done.

Fuck this boss fight my guys… christ.

[coughing fit]



And what bothers me a lot is like, afterwards, after this fight, I was just kind of out of ammo for a while but the game didn’t really seem to have anticipated that. See, this is the sort of game that I’d call completely static. What’s that mean? It means that everything in the game is all it has. That’s a bit cryptic.

Okay, so basically, everything that’s placed in the game was designed to be placed in the game. Say you find a box of ammo, that’s because a designer put it there. The other enemy types which we’ll get into in a sec, they don’t drop ammo dynamically on death like past Resi games, so all you get is the ammo that was statically placed around the game. Like, technically there’s a maximum number of bullets you can get in the game. If you need ammo there’s absolutely nothing you can do about it. Now as an experiment, try checking out a guide for the game. These guides include info on the placement of all items in the game, they’ll tell you where to pick up every single thing that the game leaves out for you and nothing more, because there is no more. There is a static amount of items in the game. That includes health, ammo, chem fluid, all consumables are static. RE4 had a well balanced dynamic difficulty and item drop system as well as some static item placement to ensure you that always had what they intended you to have, but removing the dynamic, living source of consumables, that means that there are many ways to get blocked here in this game. You can get deadlocked into a zone and have to quit… or worse… just have enough to continue playing but have a waaaaaaaay worse time.

I assume that’s what happened to me with madame in the greenhouse. I probably wasted one or two too many bullets somewhere else to be able to beat her without my knife.

It’s just… I don’t know… something about that really [cough] puts me off. I mean, I play a lot of games so it was manageable for me, but what I imagine a static placement of items does is make the game hella awful for a new player… which is just kind of in conflict with the game’s seeming attempt to make Resident Evil more appealing to a general audience of horror game lovers who might not be that experienced with shooting mechanics.




Here’s an awful segue. So what are bullets used for other than boss fights and distracting the dad to sneak past him? They’re used for these goopy shithead dudes who come in to pinch you from time to time. Credit where credit is due, given this game is a throwback to the Evil Residences of yore there was sure to be a lot of backtracking. Dropping these guys into previously totally safe areas was great, for like the handful of times it happened… man this game really has a content issue… ouf! But otherwise these guys were just kind of annoying. Again, not scary because it’s easy to break them down, they just materialize and walk straight at you, and you shoot them, and they stumble around, and they die, and that’s it so, nothing to be afraid of.

And hey! They’re goop too, so do they take on different forms? Yeah! They sure do. There’s the normal one… the skinny one… and the fat one… and that’s it.

Oh, huh, you’re not realizing why that’s an issue are you? Well, see, these guys, aside from the invincible family members and the bees that madame spawns on you, these guys are the only enemies in the game. Worse actually, the fat dudes? There are only 4 of them in the whole thing. All three times they’re used as mini boss fights, you fight them alone, disconnected from the rest of the game. And the final time you fight two of them at once… which kind of feels like the real final challenge of the game considering that the final boss itself breaks your legs and immobilizes you and only lets you aim and shoot like, like a shooting gallery did I mention how freaking dumb that is yet!?

But again, like, I can’t be the only person this bothers rights? This whole game, 3 enemy types… that’s it! No matter where you are [coughing], no matter where [coughing], no matter where you are or what you’re doing, outside of boss fights you’ll just be fighting these 2 guys, and on 3 occasions you’ll see these guys. So really what it feels like is 2, 2 freaking enemies. Like, do I have to explain why that’s lame? Do I have to explain how player expression in these sorts of games is tied to the abilities and attributes of your enemies and that only having 2 types serve as obstacles throughout your experience makes you feel like you’re being railroaded into a certain type of gameplay with no free will or options? Nah? Cool.





I heard people praise the navigation too. Just like the old ones you’re sitting there building this mental model of the environment and learning how to get from place to place in this network of houses and swamp land, and yeah, that’s really cool! Ultimately, do you do that much backtracking? Not really. Is it cool when you do? Yeah. But my issue was that despite the world’s pretty open design, there was always only one path to take, and discovering this time and time again really bother[integrated cough]ed me.

Here’s an example. I come to that greenhouse where the boss fight with the mother is about to happen. I check my map, 2 entrances, one up a staircase and one on the ground. I pick to check the upper one first, so I climb the staircase and notice that the door is open and then realize hmm… I bet you I could only get here because the other door was locked, and I bet they expected me to actually check that door first, realize it was locked, and then come up. So I go back down, check the front door and yup, it was locked. I chuckle “haha” and go back up.

This experience isn’t isolated to this one area, it extends to the whole game, even the bit of the free dlc I’ve played. The game tells you go to point A, and you check your map and there’s either exactly one path to point A or every branch is behind a locked door with a key you don’t have yet. Just like the combat, the game feels like it's constantly railroading you down this one critical path. Just popping open the map and realizing that the openness and interconnectedness is a facade that masks the true linearity of the game and that you really have no say in what you have to do, it sucks. Listen, just because a world is open doesn’t mean it's not linear. A graph is a graph, sure, but if you tell me I’m restricted to only explore certain paths, then what’s the point?

While more modern Resident Evil games featured truly linear progression, where they allowed players to express themselves and overcome challenges was in the extremely [cough] deep combat and co-op gameplay. Resident Evil 7 streamlines gameplay to the point that the final boss is just a shooting gallery HAVE I MENTIONED THIS YET!? And then it takes you into this wide world but only gives you progress for walking on the straight lines.
[coughing]

I realize that my voice is getting worse as this goes on. I was talking to somebody at work about this idea I had for the video, and he said what I should do [cough] is I should, cause he assumed this would happen also, he said what I should do is that I should record, like, backwards, I should record like the last paragraph first and then move my way up so that it sounds like a get better as I go on, um, but, I didn’t wanna do that.


There are, I believe, only two points in the game where you’re truly offered a choice. One has nothing to do with navigation and instead is story related, and even at that, there’s really only one choice that makes sense, leaving me feeling like the other choice was only added to promote a second playthrough like “aaaaay my dude… don’t you wanna know what happens if you save this random girl you just met instead of your wife who’s been missing for 3 years? You’d better restart the whole game to find out… not like there’s some website where people post a multitude of gaming videos including alternate endings and stuff like that that are easy to look up oooooooouuuuuuuh ye” [coughing fit].

“I’ll send help.”
“There won’t be anyone left to help!”

The other time the game offers you choice is in the tanker ship section. Here’s a controversial opinion. Okay, so the tanker is pretty lame. Mostly just devolves into a corridor shooter after a really lengthy stealth section and the environment is hella lame, but my favorite part of the whole game was this bit revolving around an elevator. At this point you’ve played through this area twice: once in the present and once via a flashback, so you’re just starting to learn the layout and you slowly unlock more of it, and now the game tells you to activate this elevator to save the dude. To get it working you need to get two things: a fuse and a power cable. A note gives you a clue as to where the cable is but not the fuse. So now you’re off to fix the elevator by collecting the two items in whatever order you want and it feels liberating. There are tons of enemies so you still have to sneak around a bit in this maze-like place. There’s real verticality for once as you use flights of stairs and the broken elevator shaft to go up and down and explore the whole place. For the first time it feels like it’s not exactly obvious where you have to go and what you have to do.

Using the hint helps you get the cable which then triggers a mini boss fight against a fat dude, but the fuse is nowhere to be found. There’s a neat little trick going on here that took me a while to realize. There was this earlier part in the ship where you needed to use a fuse to open a door to go higher, but now that you’ve opened the elevator shaft you have two ways of ascending from that floor. So the solution is to go back to that door from the earlier section, remove the fuse, locking yourself in, and then return to the elevator that you can now climb into.

This elevator sequence is the only part in the whole game that had me completely engaged I feel like. It was a cool puzzle, each of the level’s design, and by levels I mean like actual levels, like floors of the building, each floor’s design was distinct meaning it didn’t feel so bland, it had a few stealth situations, there was some combat, and of course there were unexpected encounters that happened to actually be scary because DING DING DING DING DING DING you didn’t expect them!

One cool little gem in this otherwise pretty linear and boring game. Aside from this part, the game feels like it can play itself, especially into the next and final part of the game where you explore a massive mine with, again, just one [cough] path to the goal.


And what bothers me most is that, again, this isn’t what I expected! Blame the marketing? I don’t know. But I thought going into this that the whole game would be about exploring and solving puzzles and backtracking through this house while the murderous family roamed freely and stalked me.

But no. Just got three pinches of that, and pinch of goopy monsters I didn’t expect to play such a major role, some paranormal stuff that really didn’t translate well into gameplay, a second half that took off its mask and revealed that it was just one straight path the whole time LITERALLY a tunnel, a couple of twists that really didn’t change much and felt a bit forced, and a final boss who immobilizes you and you can only fight from a stationary position like it’s some kind of… some kind of SHOOTING GALLERY or something.

Am I ever gonna replay this game? Probably, I promised my sister who got it for me that we’d play it, but were it not for that, definitely not. Dead honest, playing RE6 years ago with the old CPMCM in stream was waaaaaaaaay more fun than this, and I’m kind of looking more forward to playing that game finally, [throat clearing], that game finally, hm, with my sister too.


Is RE7 a bad Resident Evil game? Absolutely not, it’s a fantastic adaptation of the ideas behind the original. Does it do enough though? Or better yet, is this sort of game that was worth bringing back in 2017? I don’t know. I feel like, to me at least, an increased resolution and polygon count and advanced visual effects just made it much easier to see that this sort of game doesn’t really appeal to me. I don’t like it when games just take me for a ride on their train and try to tell me I’m having fun just because the train is really well made. I want to express myself, I want to kick and punch people in the face to preserve ammo, I want to play with a friend and blast through these crazy action-packed larger than life scenarios, I want different modes that let me experience my favorite parts of the game, I want content and the ability to express myself and get good at something. Resi 7 isn’t something you can get good at. It was really really cool, but there’s no reason for me to play it again.

My last Resident Evil video was titled “Resident Evil 6 is Not a Resident Evil Game”, and my thesis was exactly that, appended to it “so why are we judging it like one?”. At the end of the day, Resi 6 may not have stretched that weird 2 decade old itch that some of y’all have, but it was certainly the sort of game I wish more other games were like. Resi 7 certainly may scratched your back, but now I’m good. Honestly, I don’t know if I ever was really that itchy in the first place anyways. I did it and I’m good, had my fix and now I’m tired. I’m sick, [faintly] and I’m tired, ouh, I’m, I can’t get this line out. I’m sick, and I’m tired of Resident Evil 7. And that’s gonna call it, no end screen, I can’t breathe [laughing that turns into massive coughs].


“Now where the hell are you?”

“Yeah like who the fuck is LambHoot though?”

“Fuck you, nevermind.”

“You know… fuck fuck fuck fuck fuuuuuck fuuuuuuuck FUUUUUUUUUCK YOU!”


Hey whaddup look at that, it’s a freaking christmas miracle or something, suddenly my voice is better, wow it’s not like it’s been two weeks since I recorded that vo and realized that I can’t really just cut endscreens out anymore cause, you know, I’ve got Patrons to credit. To be fair though, after doing that dialogue I did just like straight go to sleep, it was, oh man, that was a… that was a day. But without further ado, my sanity throughout the production of this video, and motivation throughout the production of this video have been brought to you by a lot of people, but in particular, and it’s not like I have the names printed, or not printed, but I, you know what? You know what? I hand wrote them so give me some credit, I hand wrote them and put them on a little paper and it’s attached to the viewfinder, the little screen of the camera, anyways.

Thank you to:

Just Walli,

Ahri,

Grant Wallin OOH BABY YE,

Chris Broome,

Austin Green,

Finalblueman,

Zac Frazier, yo when’s that Magic Mike video coming out? You gotta, oh woo, did I spoile it? eeek.

Disgruntled Mushroom,

Matthew Stephen,

Cosmic Crown,

Nathan Walker,

TeeToes,

Hatwearinggamer,

Draz,

TheDailySamK,

And of course, last but not least, Mr Pikmin 2
Vinjok

And um, uh, I guess that’s it so, uh, if you’re interested in uh, whatever the heck you wanna do, whether its Patreon, I’ve got my Twitter link in the thing, I’ve got, uh, links to my website probably, anyways all sorts of crap. There are um, there are uh, LINKS, LINKS are in the description. Uh, be sure to SMASH that like button. And uh, I’d really appreciate it if you wouldn’t mind sharing this video if you CAN DO IT. But um, with that, uh, I’m just uh, I’m just done. My name has been LambHoot, and I certainly hope you take a nice fat poop. See ya later.


[Sniffle] We’re gonna talk about videogames today.

I liked Splatoon 1, I liked Splatoon 2, hey hey hey… uh… we’ve run this rodeo already nah?

So Splatoon games are the sorts of videogame-type products ya boi gets behind like it’s 👏 none 👏 of 👏 your 👏 business. They’re fun multiplayer focused games with a unique set of gameplay systems. Splatoon is uncommon, it’s different, there’s really not much to compare it against appropriately. Both games come packaged with dope singleplayer campaigns, series of hub worlds and levels showcasing some of the best of the modern Nintendo-brand single-gameplay-element 3 tiered design on offer right now.

It’s splatting, it’s platforming, it’s SPLATFORMING.

And yeah there’s a ton of other stuff but I’ve made two videos about these games already and what I really wanna communicate next is that on top of what’s already enough, SplatOne and Spla2n have both been graced in their life-cycles by the stay of constant updates.

Sometimes these updates are as simple as balances or new weapons and clothing, but sometimes it’s bigger chunks of data like whole stages and even, get this, freaking GAME MODES!

In advance, just for any real hardballers out there, sorry for the mismatched gameplay footage over this part. Very high likelihood that I’ll be playing footage of Splatoon 2 while discussing Splatoon 1 here, sorry if that bothers you but hey, ya eat what ya chew.

So, at Launch, Splatoon 1 only had one ranked game mode, Splatzones, similar to turf war but timed. Soon after the game was updated to include Tower Control, one of the most frantic and potential quick to play-out game modes. Rainmaker, a more strategic battle type with a heavier emphasis on co-operation and positioning between teammates, it was only launched at the end of Splatoon’s first summer.

More recently, Splatoon 2 has introduced a fourth ranked match type, Clam Blitz, and this is the reason we’ve gathered here today. Lemme explain.

So, the basics:

In Clam Blitz each team has a giant net close to their spawn. Throughout the stage you’ll find scattered around these clams, which by the way in case you couldn’t tell are supposed to look like footballs. So, the objective for each team is to collect clam footballs, make their way into the enemy base and then throw them into the opposing team’s net. The first team to completely fill the other’s net wins.

So there’s a lot to think about here: not only do you need to push forward and make safe way for your team into the enemy base to launch their clams, but just as important is keeping the pressure on the enemy and prevent them from venturing too close to your net.

Also, key factor I left out, you have to manage building super footballs. So the nets, it’s not actually as easy as just throwing the clams at them. The net actually has a shield that needs to be broken down first, then it opens up and catched your lobs. To break through the shield you need to use a super football which you get for collecting 10 regular clams throughout the arena. BUT, this comes with some drawbacks. Part of the draw to splatoon, to me at least, is that the reloading mechanic is embedded within a stealth system. When you dive into the ink, so long as you don’t move to quick or if you’re just a cool kid like me and use the ninja squid perk, you become totally invisible, nobody can see you on their map or on-screen. BUT, in ranked modes, whenever some player is holding a match-type critical item like the rainmaker or a superfootball, they’re position, or rather, the position of the item they’re carrying, is now marked on the map for all to see. In addition, visually you can’t hide either as the ball doesn’t dive into the ink with you.

So, all that being said, managing building super clams is important because as soon as you make one, you’ve got a target on your back and the enemy will see you coming from a mile away. So, what you wanna do is be more careful. One neat thing you can do is actually throw clams at other teammates for them to carry, so you can actually collaborate to sneak quietly into bases and then only then share enough clams with each other to break the shield.

If you’re really good, you can even use the big target as misdirection, such is the case in this awesome play by the european team, the Backsquids, in the Splatoon 2 World Championships. They ended up losing this round anyways, but this is sick play. So, 4 players, 3 of them get super clams, they’re all now on the enemy team’s radar, but they’re all hanging back playing defensively. The 4th member of their team is still in stealth, so he uses his special which is the roller, basically a big invincibility shield that also lets you move quickly. So, he activates and starts hauling ass to the enemy base, right in front of their net. Now one thing you can do in splatoon is you can, at any point, open your map and chose to spawn in on either any of your teammates positions or on the spawn beacon. So, this guy is in the enemy base, 3 dudes hanging tight with shield-breaking super clams, suddenly they all choose to warp to their boi who just snuck in, they fly right on in, none of them having to do the dirty work of clearing the path themselves, bang, land, they each throw their footballs before being killed, massive points, they instantly take the lead, absolutely amazing to watch.


When my hat’s in the ring I play a little more carefully. When you’re playing with randos in ranked it’s hard to work together so I rely on myself to make ways in, to collect clams, and if my teammates so please they can follow and share the job and the cover and the attention to our surroundings, or hey whatever, they can spawn in if I managed to crack open a shield. And hey, I’ll do the same for them, you know?


Clam Blitz is a really fun mode, it’s hands down my favorite. I’ll be real, when I first started playing it I was very confused as to how all this worked, but then when I realized how breaking the shield worked and how it’s about covering your team as them make it to the base and then shooting up at this target, it clicked! I was like, “Oh, yeah, I get this mode now, so it’s basically just like… uh... like…uh... it’s like that one mode from uhhh…. uh…. shit… what, what game am I thinking of?”

I could tell I played something JUST like this before, I could see the game in my head, I could this first-person-shooter gameplay with a mode almost identical to this… I just, I could not remember anything about it. I couldn’t place a finger on it’s name, on its character, if it even had any, not even the console it played on. I knew, I knew for a fucking fact that I played this game before, this mode was so familiar, I knew I’d seen it in another game, I just, I just, I just couldn’t come up with crap.

So I kinda stopped thinking about it for a while but in the process I had dug up some thoughts about Splatoon and first person shooters.

So, some freaking dirt suckers, as soon as Splatoon came out, these guys dropping in saying stuff like “Splatoon is Nintendo’s Response to First Person Shooters like Call of Duty”, and even today you can find tons of discussion trying to compare the two. People trying to make purchasing decisions, or ask why they should play one over the other. Like, guys, the fact that these conversations exist is a disservice to both games. This is a WRONG take.


Let's get this out of the way, Splatoon is nobody’s answer to COD, it’s not in any way meant to overlap with those types of shooting games, not in aesthetic, not in gameplay, not even in freaking market. If this was the case, rather than just a few very unique game modes, you’d see all sorts of stuff crammed into it just because hey, that’s what the other guys do! You’d see free-for-all, team deathmatch, demolition, search and destroy, capture the flag, the list goes on. You’d see single player performance ranked over team, you’d see shooting gallery singleplayer missions rather than those more in line with what you’d expect from a platformer. Splatoon may be about, yeah, shooting ink and other squid kids, but otherwise it shares nothing in common with these sorts of fps’s. It’s not trying to compete with them, it’s not trying to be them, ring ring ring, it’s Call of Duty calling, op, looks like Splatoon isn’t gonna pick up cause it’s not the answer.

“Pas la peine d'appeler je n'réponds pas au téléphone. NON!”

Wanna know what Splatoon is really about? “OK!” Hey, I made a whole video about that so lemme summarize for you real quick:

Splatoon does a lot of things, it HAS a lot of things, but above all else, what each element of the game feeds into is its true goal, building a strongly engaged self-contained game-focused community.

How does it do that? Two main things: accessibility and network features. Mix em together you get community, simple as that. How? Ok.

The game itself is incredibly easy to pick up and understand. Put it this way, if you’ve never played a game before do you think you could gleam anything important from some footage of a game of like Battlefront or something? Nah, probably not. Splatoon though? Oh yeah that’s easy, just look at the colors, on the ground, on the enemies, on everything, that gives you all the information you need. Can’t figure out dual stick aiming? No worries, there’s some gyro to easy that vertical tension fam. Splatoon, accessible, done.

Then operating at the same level but in a whole different way you’ve got these network features, a blanket term I’m using both for social network kinda stuff but also other features that are tied for seemingly no clear reason to online connection. You’ve got drawable messages that appear over character’s heads and plastered to walls in the hubworld. You’ve got votes that split up the entire player-base from time to time. You’ve got ways to order clothes by looking at the character models of other players. Cool networking stuff goes on in the hub area, activities and events that make you feel banded to the people you’ve been playing with.

And so what’s great is these two sides of splatoon will drive traffic to one another. Playing the game will make you want to exit to collect bonuses, being in the hub world will make you stop to take in the player messages, maybe even write a message of your own. You’ll take in the shopping, the clothing inspection, it’ll help you get the right gear to get back into the action, into the game! Boom, you’ve got a loop. You play, you go back to hub, you interact, you play, and so on so on poop scoop loop provides hoop.

I am stuck. I am, I live in my brain school.

Now all that comes from Splatoon 1 and got carried into 2, but 2 adds some stuff of its own. I mean, check this out. Splatoon 2 adds a 4 player zombies kinda hoard survival mode called Salmon run. Lots a fun, teaches you new playstyles you wouldn’t bother with otherwise, all the mini-bossed test certain skills, I wouldn’t be the first to argue that it’s annoying that secondary weapons never rotate but whatever.

How how did they adapt this mode to the community building loop the main multiplayer component has? Easy: by limiting its availability.

Ya, ya ever hear of this thing called supply and demand? Cause uh, cause I didn’t, I was no freaking business student, show me some computer science I got you fam, so let's talk about weighted networks, game theory and balancing.

“Tout c'que tu peux raconter n'est pas intéressant”

So this is pretty wild but when planning the layouts of road networks you can actually use game theory to model traffic and determine the balances of networks. See, when people traverse a network they eventually reach some sort of equilibrium. Now here’s the issue, there’s different kinds of equilibrium.

So pulling examples straight from school, imagine this road network. The weights on the edges represent cost of taking them, and the variables X and Y refer to how many people are on that road, so basically some have static costs, some cost more depending on how many other people are driving there, aka traffic slows ya down. Say you’ve got 200 dudes wanna drive from city A to city B, right now you’ve got a social optimum equilibrium where 100 take one path and 100 take the other, this is the best case for everyone. This is why the traffic is also in what’s called a Nash Equilibrium, meaning no person has incentive to switch and take a path other than the one they’re on. Basically, if a driver from one route switches to the other they’d only be increasing the traffic and cost of taking the road they’re switching to.

So everyone is happy, everyone has as low of a driving cost as possible.

So, “Braess” yourself, and this is something real that’s been observed, introducing Braess’ Paradox which proposes that adding more options to an already balanced network and can actually lead to worse results.

So, for whatever reason you decide to add a new road to this network with a 0 cost, uh oh. Now, due to some tricky game theory crap, the social optimum, the traffic distribution that’s best for everyone together is no longer in Nash equilibrium, meaning from an individual’s perspective, they have more incentive to switch routes than remain in the case where its split 50/50. The Nash here, the equilibrium where nobody would change their strategy because it would either increase their cost or decrease that of their opponent is actually this, where all drivers take the same exact route, and sadly, this smears the cost for all of them, ouch.


So what’s the point of all this shit? Like I said, and like ya Braess said, adding options can actually cause the equilibrium in a balanced network to change to everyone’s disfavor. This is real, traffic can be worsened by adding roads, prisoners can reach un-socially optimal sentences, and get this: people can have less fun.

So a lot of people complain about how Salmon run isn’t always available to play, how its only online for a few hours at a time and then becomes locked, but what most people don’t realize is that what the game’s administrators are doing is toggling between THIS and THIS to ensure that everyone has as much fun as possible. By using principles of game theory and this weird traffic paradox they can attempt to control the flow of players between modes to sort of “fluff up” the numbers of people playing a mode that would otherwise disinterest people after a few rounds.

Imagine if Salmon Run were always available, what would be the consequences? Well, some would probably play it exclusively, leaving less people playing the regular competitive multiplayer modes. You’d basically be splitting up the community, there would be subsets of people who only cared about one half. Also, the nature of salmon run as a survival kinda mode means that, unlike the always evolving competitive games, you’d have a lot of people get their fix and then not play any more. It’s not its fault, It gets old much faster than the main game. This means, hey, as a buyer, you may have just gotten this game but the playerbase for one of the modes is dead and now you’re not getting your money’s worth. You can see this in effect today if you try matchmaking in any of the more complex always-available modes in an old Call of Duty like Search and Destroy or Demolition. There’s not enough active players to keep these modes living. Nobody’s playing them anymore, the people that are left still even on the game are only interested in basic stuff like team deathmatch and so that’s all the game really is.

So here’s what Splatoon 2 accomplishes by managing salmon run the way it does:
It ensures that there’s always people with interest in playing the mode, and more importantly it will drag people away from other modes only temporarily to play. Since Salmon Run isn’t always available, if you happen to be playing it is, you have more incentive to play it, it’s a better way to capitalize on your time than just playing modes you’ll still be able to partake in later. This is where social optimum and Nash come face to face. Not only do you have incentive to play this over that, but so does everyone else, and this is good for you and everyone else because it means that there’s always gonna be a reliably large amount of players in this mode when it’s on. You won’t have to wait long to matchmake because everyone’s here NOW.

So easy enough to understand but you could imagine after quite a while this still getting old, after a few rounds not really feeling it anymore. Well, that's where additional incentives come in. That’s why every opening of Salmon Run has a different weapon rotation, a different stage, and why every month there’s a new special piece of gear that can only be unlocked for playing the mode enough in that month. This delays that dying off effect by giving both inexperienced and well experienced players reason to continue playing.

Whether it’s just playing the mode itself or going for the unlockables, there’s always something that can uniquely be done every time the Salmon Run gates are opened. Impressive most is that it does this without harming its community or without forming one of its own, and that’s dope as hell.

After all, Splatoon is about building a strongly engaged self-contained game-focused community, you don’t wanna risk harming that in any way by making, say, a spin-off mode that’s as strong as the main stuff, so, you limit the audience’s access to it, badabing.



And this, it got me thinking about other sorts of self-contained communities I’d been a part of, and I started to realize something...


BUT, whoa, wait, hold on a sec. Back to multiplayer, back to Clam Blitz, the game where you go around with your team defending your base while trying to sneak into the enemy’s, and then work together to break down a suspended target… a game mode I could swear I’d played before but couldn’t remember where…

Turns out the problem was I was thinking these sorts of things, when really I should’a been thinking, well, Laval. Laval is a giant freaking place on the north shore of Montreal. It’s populated entirely by freaking greasy-ass greeksters and italians, so, aside from having a really good bus system it’s basically my personal hell and I’m 99% certain it’s where I will fucking die.

So as a greasy-ass greekster italian, as you could imagine, as a kid, got invited to a lot of cousin’s birthday parties out there, still do in the modern age let's be real, and one popular destination for such events was and is the underground establishment right next to a bingo parlor, the laser tag joint known as DarkZone Laval. Shout out I guess by the way for letting me film.

So after hitting up ya boi Broc aka Kevan aka BobbyBroccoli aka Game of the Year 2017 aka fake scottish Hamish Black freaking wannabe aka this cool guy who you should definitely check out his series of videos he made about Bill Nye, and Bill Nye’s entertainment career leading up to his Netflix show, yo anyways basically we went to, we went to DarkZone, we had a good time.


See, the game I was imagining that whole time, the one I could swear was some sort of old first-person-shooter, it wasn’t just that, just an fps, it was an ACTUAL fps, as in, I, the first-person, was the character I was recalling and seeing images from the point of view of.


Some context I think is cool to know. As I’ve learned, the laser tag industry is surprisingly big, and I guess it’s pretty obvious once you start to think about it but there are dealers who sell and license equipment and game management software for laser tag joints. Apparently there’s some serious flexibility allotted to the purchasers as to how they’d like to set up their games, and that’s why most laser tag places you’ve probably been to are always completely different.

One of the components that DarkZone has that nobody else in town does is these base things. After some research I believe what they’re sporting are an older model something called the SIRIUS STATION. It’s small target with flashing lights surrounding it. In DarkZone there are three of these around the field each marking an enemy base, because there’re always 3 teams at this place.


Might as well mention it here, sorry by the way if any of this footage is a little weird, it’s first time using the knockoff gopro for something real, also it got dislodged at one point so half the footage I expected to be able to use ended up just being of the ceiling, but uh, listen, it’s an A for effort get outta here.

The goal for each team is to gain points by either tagging enemies or destroying their opponent’s bases, but since the bases are worth so much those are pretty much your goal. Now, here’s where things get neat and the game asks for serious co-operation between players. The base target has a shield represented by those LEDs surrounding it. Before becoming vulnerable you need to fire at each one until they all turn off, then fire at the base itself until you hear a big explosion sound effect and you know you did it. BUT, here’s the catch: only one player can attack the base at a time, that includes the whole destruction procedure, shooting all the surrounding lights, shooting the core, all that can only be done by one person at a time, and once they’ve done it once, they can’t do it again for the rest of the game. It’s kinda weird, it’s like, once one person has taken a shot at the shield, the base assault kinda “belongs” to them. Like, if any other player shoot it nothing will happen, so they get locked in and have to complete it alone.

So here’s where the teamwork comes in: so, while some players will stay at the base and defend it from the two teams of oncoming attackers, few smaller groups will venture forward and try to find an opening into one of the enemy bases. If and once they get in, players have to take turns each destroying the base while the others defend them, switching every time it respawns, because, by the way, the base respawns after a few seconds after its destroyed.

And that’s really the gist of it. This needlessly complex set of instructions that need to be followed to a T in order to destroy bases and win the game set the thing up to be hyper co-operative. Unlike other laser tag joints *cough* *cough* laser quest on saint Catherine, you won’t be able to make any sort of valuable contribution to your team if you go off solo ramboing it, this is more than just deathmatch. There are 3 count’em 3 teams, 2 bases for you to try to destroy as many times as possible, and what you need in order to accomplish that is backup for yourself and to be backup for others. DarkZone’s game is really cool… almost makes up for its vomit inducing website.

Listen, it's freaking Laval, there had to turd hiding in the stack, come on!


And now hopefully you can see how I was able to perceive similarities between this and Clam Blitz. You’ve got bases, you’ve got defense and stealthy offense, once you make it into the base you’ve gotta blitz it as quick and as coordinatedly as possible before leaving, and of course, team with the most points by the end wins.

It was really wild to be able to make that connection and to resolve that this game mode in Splatoon did something that I couldn’t think of any other computer games doing but was the staple of a real-world game at a real-world place I played many times as a kid.

And so that got me thinking about some of Splatoon’s other game modes. I mean, I already knew that some of them took inspiration from a category of games including summer camp and elementary school games, which by the way should probably have a proper title, but anyways, I knew this, it’s easy to recognize.

I mean, straight up lets do it: Rainmaker? Easy, it’s capture the flag. You pick up the rainmaker and you’ve gotta take it to the enemy base without it getting stolen. Splatzones? It’s just king of the hill, team that holds the one or two zones the longest wins. Tower Control, get this, is Nintendo flexing their creative juices by mixing both King of the Hill with Tug of War. The game is won by holding the tower for longest, but unlike the static splatzones which are in the middle of the level, the tower moves along a path towards the goal while you have it. The goal being in the enemy base though means that the further you make it, the more your efforts are stretched thin and the better a chance your opponents have to take it from you and pull from the other side. Genius stuff. And then of course following that, the basic mode, Turf War, that’s just plain Tug of War, albeit with one twist. Two sides are “pulling” as it were on each other's turf until time runs out and then the match is called. So obviously there’s no chance for a knockout victory here but what makes it special is that its timed. Really what matters most are the actions in the last 30 seconds of the game, the actions whose impacts the enemy players might not have time left to paint over.

And that’s all of them, of all the game modes in Splatoon not a single one develops upon some idea from Call of Duty or Battlefield or any of those guys, instead, they draw their rules from games you used to play as a kid at school and at summer camp.

“Yo wassup, random insert middle of this video, so, haven’t been to this park since I was in summer camp, this is the last park I new that had tall swings, and they’ve replaced them with these short swings. You can’t have fun on this. The heck man, kids these days don’t even know the thrill of almost dying every time you go up and down on a swing. Come on, it’s ridiculous.”

So camp and grade school games are interesting, to me at least, for 2 reasons.
1, their origins. Many such games such as tug of war can trace their roots back to ancient sporting events, others can’t really be traced as they often seem to come from no common ancestor but instead a series of convergent evolutions.

There was a tennis ball game we played at my elementary school called Murderball that I was looking up online a while ago. After a hard time finding any documentation about it, I stumbled upon a wikipedia article and learned that the most common name for it was actually “Butt’s Up” and that it was played in many schoolyards going by many different names. I always assumed some adult taught us the game in gym class or something and then we just played it on our own, but this was a neat lesson in that most of these types of games were invented by kids and survived by word of mouth. I mean, between when I started planning this video and now, the wikipedia page has actually been edited to remove most of the game’s aliases citing the reason to be the list of popular names was excessively long.

Just a quick tangent that nobody cares about but addressing wikipedia contributor “The Brave Celery” directly, I think this is a mistake. Removing these popular names for the game actually made it much harder for me to find it from a google search later. When it comes to word-of-mouth kids games like this, I think all names should be preserved as content on the main page, it’s part of the game’s history. I mean, my school had a variant called Babyball that I see no reference to here and I may as well be the only person who freaking remembers it. So without keeping these names, part of this game, parts of the people who made it and played it, it gets lost. Don’t do this crap, you freaking, you freaking celery stick, I don’t care how brave you are.


Which brings us to the second reason these kinds of games are so interesting, their gameplay and motivation/goals. Much like games in splatoon, camp games are quick, short and focus on one or two rules. Most of the games I played at my summer camp, Frimouses, always had the same goal for instance: play until time runs out, aka play until recess is over or until camp is over. Points don’t matter, they’re not tallied, maybe you get a sense of who’s performing better, who’s most athletic or whatever, but ultimately it doesn’t matter at all. The motivation, the objective “playing until time runs out” is other words for “play to have fun”, “have fun while there’s time”, just, “have freaking fun”. These games are just time wasters. Fun, but motivating for no other reason than they’re something to do with time.

Tie that back to their origins, to the fact that so many of them go by so many different names, that naming them was part of the course of playing them, that often their rules were made up as you went along, that the process of playing these games meant first collaboratively inventing them all in the interest of just spending time having fun with friends. Thiiiiis starts to take us out of the realm of games with their strict rulesets and mechanisms and win and lose states and payoff matrices, and into a world where you automatically win just for participating... 

This is the world of social activities, spending time having fun with friends, no winning, no losing, just, just a way to spend time.


So there’s something to be said about the fact that of all places to take inspiration from, Splatoon picks these. I mean, remember, Splatoon’s goal is ultimately community, and the goals of camp games within the setting of camp is to, you guessed it, build bonds between camp goers and form a community. Camp is a really weird experience, you’re not with the same group of kids you spend most of the year with at school, the guardians aren’t adults trying to teach you anything, they’re teenagers with cpr training and waaaay too high of a sex drive for eachother, and hey in my case it's probably in a different language too. So the social nature of these games serves to help people to get to know each other, to have fun and learn how to best behave around others, find out who operates on the same “fun wavelength” as them and form friendships.

Maybe you split people up by arbitrary characteristics like age or favorite food or whatever, and then ask them to compete, but really none of this is about competition, it’s about using a forced sense of pride as a catalyst to community engagement. In case you didn’t realize this past little bit has been just as applicable to summer camp as it is to Splatoon, and that’s what I’m trying to get at here, as well as how freaking cool that is.

Splatoon isn’t Nintendo’s answer to first person shooters, it’s their answer to summer camp. As if, you know, it wasn’t obvious enough given some of its stages and how both games were released at the start of summer BUT HEY! Better late than never! Splatoon is a summery game, summer is its main theme, I’m an idiot for not really grasping that sooner.

I mean obviously I knew it was part of its aesthetics and theming but I didn’t realize it was part of its gameplay, and that’s cool to figure out.

Summer camp, that, that’s what it’s trying to be, that’s why its game modes are the way they are, that’s why it’s so unique and accessible, that’s why it tries to control the flow of its players by artificially limiting access to certain modes, and that’s why, I’ve finally realized, it’s one of my favorite games.

Summer camp meant a lot to me growing up. Originally I went to a less social camp, a much more competitive karate themed one where I got bullied to hell and back and eventually got wrist broken by a kid. It’s only after leaving that one and going to a new camp, one with real monitors and fun games and cool activities that I realized how chill it was to just hang out every day with people under the guise of playing games the whole time.

Now, Splatoon just barely scratches the surface here, and now having realized what it’s really going for all these memories of much more creative camp games are coming to mind. I’m really looking forward to seeing where the Splatoon series takes things next, how weird things will get, cause with a source of inspiration this pure, it’s bound to be good.

It’s abundantly clear now to me that this was deliberate and that summer camp type games were used as an inspiration for Splatoon on purpose. They’re quick, they’re proven, they’re not overly aggressive or competitive, they’re friendly, and their purposes within the grander context of summer camp align precisely with the goals of game modes in Splatoon’s multiplayer. Hijack those principles? Why not?

Friends, relatives, thank you for stopping by, I really wanted this to be a shorter video but ouf. See y’all on the flipside of that nintendo online pay gate. Life might get a bit rough for a bit out here on my end so please be patient, but hopefully next I’ll see you guys, pour yourselves a nice cup of goddamn coffee, we’re gonna rip it, we’re gonna pick it, we’re gonna kick it with, with pikmin. Shout out to Nico, convinced me to fire on best guns. 

Hamish: “I seem to remember his video on Resident Evil 6 being really good.”

Nico: “Oh, LambHoot is, in my opinion, firing on his best guns when it’s Resident Evil and when it is Pikmin, right now”

Hamish: “Oh yea-ea-eah yeah”

Uh, anyways, thanks! Peace out ya damn socks.


“Why didn’t you slide?”

“Cause my, my butt, my butt, is exactly like this. My Butt is exactly like this.”

Yo wassup ding dongs? 8/10 youtube gaming guru here dropping you some hot takes from my bathroom studio.

You don’t believe me? Check it. There’s my, there’s my laptop sitting on the toilet, there’s my microphone literally in the sink. You know there’s a reason you don’t, you never wanna go visit the back of a restaurant, see how your food is made. Cause, this is how your videos are made, it’s literally, literally in the bathroom… cause my videos are crap… you can say it. You can’t now actually I made the joke so now it’s not funny cause see if I make the joke it’s not funny, but if you make the joke, hahaha, “you’re full of crap you even make your videos in the bathroom”, if I make the joke “haha you’re so lame you’re stretching so far for that joke” fuck you!

So if you’ve been squattin here for a while you might be aware that one of my favorite series is Metal Gear Solid. Somewhat embarrassingly it got me into filmmaking, which as the story goes I was able to transfer the familiarity of into a different type of video making, made a couple of bad life decisions, 4 on an annual basis to be precise, and voila, here we are! Surprisingly though, for a series that inspired such getups as this, somehow I’ve never touched it in any more appropriate capacity.

Today that changes, as did my opinion on the series, which I guess is my way of formally announcing that these days I still appreciate everything the series meant to me as a goofy communist teenager, but I recognize that Metal Gear Solid, the game, is kinda shit. And whooo ho ho hold up, that’s not just because of MGSV, but each one, while in many ways yes pushing the medium further and yes we should acknowledge that, they all still have some pretty serious issues that if you’re the type of person that sees em, you’ll start to have a poopy time.

Going backward, why not? Metal Gear Solid 5 is literally unfinished. Aside from that it poorly adapts itself to the open world. The best parts of MGSV are those that revert to a linear structure, and the worst are those that try to be open. How did it get it that bad? Who really knows? I proposed a possible reason based on some managerial theory a fews years back, but who’s to really say?

Metal Gear Solid 4 might not deliver the sort of content I wanted, but it went as far as the game ever would in terms of player control before making you feel like an absolute superhero. There’s a weight to this stealthy protagonist, everything you do is intentional and carefully planned out. If you mess up you can still take on and unload a beating if you’re good enough, but you’re not so powerful you can always rely on strength. And this is great, the game is almost perfect, the balanced stealth/action gameplay is tied up into this deep stretching narrative mostly told through cutscenes but who’s themes pervade through the actual gameplay. Metal Gear Solid 4 is a solid game, a real good triple A experience... up until the second half where it fucks off with all that battlefield drama, drops you a set of 3 chapters in a row that railroad you like it’s the shittiest game of monopoly, none of them give you any room to breathe, each of their gimmicks overstays its welcome and SO HELP ME GOD there is a whole chapter of this stealth action war game without a single human enemy. It’s just robots, shitty hand robots. What the fuck happened?

Metal Gear Solid 3… ouf, I’m sweating here… this game somehow is as perfect as it is imperfect. What I’m saying is that it’s the best at being the worst. Uuuugh, I’m saying it’s really good, but in the wrong way… this is confusing and stressful. Metal Gear Solid 3 isn’t a bad game, but the issue I have with it is something I’ll be able to convince you of by the end of this video only, unfortunately.

Metal Gear Solid 2? Oh yeah, the game where you’re playing player two to big brother Snake. He’s doing all the cool stuff, your dumb character is defusing bombs, which means by extension you’re stuck there defusing bombs. Half the game feels like you’re missing out on the real beef, and the other half is just figuring out navigation between these struts and bridges. When it gets your feet wet damn can it pull the stealth off, but problem is it's not evenly distributing it. The sections that do get the royal treatment get backtracked through time and time again, it’s a real pain and makes the game’s world seem really shallow.

And then there’s Metal Gear Solid 1, the game that started it all. Every once in a while I get nostalgic and revisit it, and every single time I’m reminded exactly why. It’s the codec calls. I am being completely honest I have more fun listening to goofy voice actors literally phoning it in than I do with most of the game, not to discredit the game, no way. Metal Gear Solid came at a time before, well, straight up 3 dimensional shooting. As soon as MGS2 opened that door, stealth was permanently changed. Giving the player for the first time a deeper and wider cone of view than the enemies meant most cleverly designed stealth rooms could be deconstructed using point of view camera on a pivot and a tranq pistol with perfect aim.

Metal Gear Solid 1 wasn’t like this. Yeah, you could use first person mode but you couldn’t do anything in it. You’re actionable area was totally encapsulated by the screen. Off-screen you had no impact. This simple limitation is what made Metal Gear Solid’s stealth so perfect. Sneaking around an environment you can fully scope out is great and makes you feel clever, but being able to preserve disalert on a second to second basis is a whole other thing.

The series starter isn’t void of it’s own flaws though. Christ, aight, how many times you’ve heard a guy with either an irish or british or scottish accent point out that the second screen of the game is the most complex, and that no other area in the game uses the snow system as an obstacle for stealth? And it’s true. Metal Gear Solid is packed with good times but worse than just being unevenly distributed, it’s top-heavy. Basically everything up until you change the disc is fantastic. From that point on though things chug along. You start having less stealth rooms, you do uninteresting backtracking, there’s some weird forced combat things, it’s so bad you’re not even seeing footage of it on-screen right now because I don’t freaking want to go back and play it! It’s definitely not that I’m lazy and that the real meat of this video isn’t even about MGS1 and so I don’t want to capture a ton of footage of the last half just for this one section… it’s definitely not that, it’s MOST CERTAINLY that it’s so bad I refuse to play it, yeah, huh?
“When you grapefruit your man, it’s gonna feel as if you are giving him head and fucking him at the same time. No better feeling will he ever get than being grapefruited”

“Who are you?”

“Deepthroat?”

“Are you nearby?”

Cough cough segue, So what’s this video freaking about?

Well, see, every once in a while when I make my nostalgic pilgrimage back to that old title screen, I remember that there’s actually another reason I revisit it…


Metal Gear Solid came with it a game mode called VR Training. Now I’ve dug around and surprisingly it’s hard to find concrete details on this part of the game, so I’m not really sure if I should say that it’s a supplementary challenge for once the game is done, because it feels like that, or if I should say that it’s a training mode to help you master each system and mechanic before going into the game, because it kind of feels like that too.

VR Training is kind of its own self-contained beast and it’s really cool. Rather than codec conversations instructing you on where to go and what to do, these strip the game down to its core. A small text bubble reminds you of your objective, maybe gives you a hint, the camera pans across the whole stage briefly and BAM you’re in. You know where you’ve gotta go and the challenge is getting there as quickly as possible.

The missions are all sneaking mode style, so unlike the main game the fail state is much more accessible. Get spotted once and you’re out. You also have no weapons, and since incapacitating enemies takes too much time you realize that there’s always gonna be some clear path to the goal, your meta objective is to uncover it through trial and error, otherwise known as reset difficulty, except hey, unlike some spongebob that I used to know, you fuck up you can restart instantly which is extremely important considering how many of these missions, once you get familiar with them, can take just seconds to slap around.

The time attack mode is where the greatest potential in this game is. It’s a cool little motivator, see at the end of each mission you get your score measured in seconds and a voice clip based on if you got first, second, third place, or didn’t rank at all, so before you even read the numbers you know if you did the best. Looking at the screen and seeing scores for faster times tells the player that either the solution they’ve found to a level can be done faster, or that there’s another way to do it that they haven’t considered, that they’re missing. It motivates the player to explore new things, more often than not techniques that the developers intend for them to learn, techniques that are required in order to rank first in the level and hear colonel Campbell go “Excellent Snake”.

Example of this in the field: the route I found on Time Attack Stage 4 was good enough and took me a while to figure out, but upon finally executing it without flaw, seeing on the score screen that there was somehow a way to beat this level in 9 seconds was tantalizing. Here I am attempt after attempt after attempt, feeling like the master of this stage and somehow there’s a way to do it way faster that I missed. I didn’t just want to figure it out, I needed to. I couldn’t allow myself to proceed to level 5 until I had the complete solution for level 4. And what was cool about this situation was that knowing the solution I had found, I could tell right away that of the two options, doing this faster wasn’t possible. There was no way, I was pulling this off as fast as I could, so that faster score meant to me that whatever the heck it was, it was way different than what I was doing, which was a neat hint, a neat shove in the right direction which would teach me something else.

Motivating someone to do something you want them to do, that’s another way of saying “nudging”, and when a game pulls that off intrinsically ooouuuu hot tomato can you smell what the Rock is cooking?


No? Cause I sure can, smells to me like a whole dedicated stand-alone VR Missions game headed our way. Yup, this one got dropped on store shoppers later, including all of the previous levels from the last game and then some that take it to, EXCUSE ME, the next level.

So sneaking mode returns though it’s the same exact missions as the last game. A variant of it is available too though, Eliminate All sneaking mode. In this version not only do you need to remain unnoticed until the goal, but you also need to kill all enemies before it opens up. It takes the same levels as last time, albeit with a few minor changes, and it makes a whole different game out of it.

Every guard in the level which you’ve previously learned how to slip passed without confronting, well now you have to confront them. Each enemy is a sub goal that unlocks the final one, so this mode sees you explore much more of the levels than that single best path to the goal that you’ve already uncovered in regular sneaking, a best path that, lets face it, was often best because as a matter of fact it kept you far from all of them.

Like the last mode its a timed challenge, but it’s also now a general efficiency one. As the stages progress the levels start giving you less and less bullets, in some cases, considering it takes 3 shots to kill a man, they give barely enough to afford any waste. Now of course killing enemies takes time, but if you do it well and preserve ammo, each bullet you end the mission with will reduce your time once you get to the goal, shaving fractions of seconds off the clock as a reward for eliminated them presumably in the best possible way. A side effect of this is that completing a level now and seeing that you didn’t get the best score means not only that the level might expect you to be able to do what you just did faster or doing something that takes less time altogether, but it might also mean that there’s a better way to eliminate everyone. Maybe one enemy can be choked to save bullets equals seconds, or maybe two enemies patrols will intersect if you wait meaning you can kill them both quickly at the same time. There’s a lot more variables and a lot more to think about in this mode. It’s super fun, but more importantly it's around this point that you realize something a bit whack.

The missions in these two modes, the way playing it teaches you basically all the environmental stealth systems in the context of pure sneaking and elimination, this is more fun and better at doing what it’s trying to do than anything in the actual main game. Think about it, I mean plain example, snow. In the main story you’ve got this one guard in the second room of whole game who spots your footsteps in the snow and follows them, and that’s it. This concept appears never again throughout any of the rest of it. It’s not expanded upon, it’s not explored deeper. It’s one crappy instance of a really cool system that deserved more attention. That’s why I say I’m not sure of the VR missions were intended as training or not, because when it comes to some elements of the game, not only does it teach them to you but it challenges you on them more than the actual game does. And not to totally rip off MatthewMatosis here who’s already gone into this, but it’s the same for a lot of other environmental obstacles. Noise making tiles, collapsing trap tiles, laser trip wires, none of these are used as creatively in the actual game as they are in the expansion levels, and as Matt the man Matosis pointed out himself, there’s only a handful of sections in the game dedicated to avoiding an alert phase which are backtracked to and from multiple times and reuse the same game total 23 freaking guards for the whole of it. 

And so what you realize is that, well, at least if you’re like me or papa double-o-tosis and you really enjoy the stealth gameplay, considering just how much content there is so far in the VR missions, then it’s impossible not to come to see that this focused bonus crap is better than the actual game… and you still don’t even know about the other modes.

There’s a whole mode dedicated to weapons training. The gun ones are kind of crap, partly due to the limitation of the camera being placed behind the character and a slant such that only things down-range from you are fully visible, so when it forces you to shoot at targets offscreen to the left or right it’s kind of garbage. But other weapons which weren’t really used to their full potential in the story get crazy special treatment here. 

Grenades? You needed them for like one boss fight in the main thing. Here though I’m learning crap I didn’t even know they did! The grenade training levels force you to learn about the force of throws, how running affects distance, teaches you to use the arc of a throw to reach higher spots, how to use both of those to time throws against inaccessible moving targets, also sometimes bouncing it off walls, and finally how to cook grenades, really cleverly forcing you to figure it out by placing a target in a bottomless pit that a grenade can’t safely lay on and eventually explode within range. No, you have to cook it just long enough so that it detonates as its passing the target, and badabing solid stuff. You’d never do stuff like this in the main game even though technically all of this behavior was at your disposal.

There’s an advanced mode too which is a combination of stealth and gun training against human guards. In this mode you’re still ranked on time but being spotted isn’t a game over. Instead you’re given the sense of freedom to tackle things as you please. You can get bonuses for being stealthy and saving bullets but really the idea is that these stages will put everything you’ve learned to the test.

In many ways, again, they treat a lot of things better than the story does. Take c4 for instance. In the main game its use is required to break a few weak walls, meaning when you get the few amounts of the stuff that you do, you never use it outside of this function. VR missions though? Holy crap the stuff they make you do with c4. I mean, there’s a puzzle stage that taught me something I didn’t know and honestly couldn’t believe. I mean, did you know that you can plant c4 on guards in Metal Gear Solid 1? Was there ever a part outside of this extra mission where you’d ever do that? Absolutely not, it would never make sense. But here it’s the only way to destroy the two security cameras in the center of the map protecting the goal. It’s funny, this level almost only works so well as a consequence of the game doing such a poor job teaching you about c4. Like, the puzzle is that c4 can be placed on dudes, once you know that, the thing is done, that’s the solution plain and simple. The only obstacle in the way of that is, like, the dozen or so hours you’ve spent playing and not knowing that. This level only works because main MGS1 is crap.

The sniper rifle, another gun that was garbo in the main game, here we see what MGS1 can do when the levels are designed specifically for it. Each one of these is kind of like a long distance shooting gallery. As you’d know if you’d ever played this game, the sniper wobbles like a son-a-ma-bitch, but there’s a medicine you can take that temporarily steadies your aim. Problem: each of the sniper missions starts you off without the pills, if you want them you’ll need to make the short trek out to pick them up, but need I remind you that this is timed, so basically there’s a weird gamble to make here. Maybe it’s not worth fetching the pills because of how long it takes, and instead you should just focus on shooting as quickly as possible to save time… buuuuut since preserving ammo shaves time off the clock, maybe the time spent picking up the pills will be more than paid off in the ammo it saves you by stabilizing your aim, giving you a better score at the end by translating that increased accuracy into more bullets left at the end into negative time bonuses. You have to consider things like if there’s a vantage point close to the pills or if they’re in a worse sniping spot then where you began. In one instance of genius level design, they place the pills very close to a little nook, a perfect sniping shelter, why not go for them, right? So you fall for it, you pick up the pills and then begin sniping from that position and everything’s going alright until uh oh, there’s one target left on the map but for the life of you ya just can’t spot him. Turns out the pills were a trap. There’s a single target in the structure across from you who’s placed in a way such that he’s obstructed by the surroundings if you’re trying to view him from the vantage point closest to the pills. To get him you need to waste time getting back up, going to the starting position, and popping a squat to shoot before you can finish the level. Absolutely genius, the formless nature of the VR missions and their reset difficulty allowed for these really cool and creative challenges that go far beyond the scope of the main game. There is just so much potential in these missions, they prove that there is a better game lying inside of Metal Gear Solid 1 than Metal Gear Solid 1.

Of course though, this wouldn’t be a proper substitute for the main game without some really goofy out of the box shit. Metal Gear Solid’s main game was hardcore and mature and political sure, but it was also goofy as all hell and didn’t take itself too seriously.

“I don’t know what happened. I just couldn’t pull the trigger right away. I never had any problems in training… But when I thought about my bullets tearing through those soldiers’ bodies, I hesitated...”

“Shooting at targets and shooting at living, breathing people are different.”

“Ever since I was a little girl, I always dreamed about being a soldier...”



“A disguise?”

“She had such a cute way of walking. SHe kind of wiggles her behind...”

“You were really looking.”

“Well, she’s got a very cute behind...”

“Way of walking, huh.”


And hey, the VR missions absolutely pull that over too. There are a couple of modes you unlock afterwards which are puzzle based. Some are pretty dumb gimmick stages that don’t really take much skill or problem solving, it’s clear they’re just there for the ridiculous spectacle of bodies knocking over other bodies and crap, but some are actually really legit. Like, these are real well-designed puzzles built to be solved using the mechanics you’ve just spent hours and hours honing in sneaking and combat stages. They function as they should and some really get you scratching your head, especially as not only do they require some thought to solve but also some skill to execute.

And then there’s the special stages, these, I don’t even fucking know what to say. This is where the real bananas get peeled. The heck is this mission description? “The truth is over there”? What? OOOOH MY FUCKING GOD! WHAT THE HOLY HELL IS THAT!?

Yeah, you know what, I’d say, fun weird stuff, it’s what you want, it’s in this game, don’t worry.

And finally there’s the Mystery mode, the one that like, just, is totally unexpected but works so well. I don’t wanna spoil any of it, but like, it’s a detective game where each level a guy is killed but the murder leaves some sort of hint behind, and then you’ve gotta use, like, fucking logic… like, knowledge you have about the external world to pick the guilty suspect out of the lineup, and I know that might sound boring as hell but like… it really really works. They push this concept as far as it can go, it’s really impressive. Some of them had me scratching my head for a real good while, particularly the final one which, man, a thing of beauty that one. Still blows my mind to this day that they pulled that off. But anyways, there’s some other game types in VR missions like survival and one man army battles and crap like that, but the Mystery mode is the highlight I’ll pivot on here.








Ao blah blah blah, some years pass, Kojima time travels to 2018, goes back, makes a game based off what he saw and robs your parents of their hard-earned cash just in time for the holiday season of 2001. Ho ho ho it’s a game about vampires.

“He survived by feeding on the blood of his family to quench his thirst. That was how he acquired a taste for blood...”

“So that’s why they call him Vamp...”

“No. Vamp isn’t for vampire. It’s because he’s bisexual...”

WHAT!?

So yada yada yada, game is kinda boring, really long, you feel like player 2 to a player 1 that doesn’t exist, already done this BAM, you got this sick VR missions again and holy hell it’s like… why isn’t this just the main game? Or like, why aren’t these levels just built into the game’s world? The missions here are much cooler and more appealing than anything in the main mission, this is where the real gameplay is!

I mean christ look at this. This is me loading my save file from whenever the last time I played this was. I spent over 8 hours just in VR and had completed 17% of this mode… this is content my guys… this is an overloaded baked potato of a freaking game. You smell that? That’s what the Rock’s really been cooking!

In MGS2 they’ve consolidated both practice and time attack modes into a single one, meaning every play of a mission is a potential run for a high time attack score. The game also changes scores from being measured in units of time with lower times being preferable to having a points system that goes up as you do better. Saving time gives you points, saving ammo gives you points, not being spotten gives you a stealth bonus of, you guessed it, points. In this game, rather than bonuses shaving time off, they boost up your score, it’s ultimately the same thing but just presented differently. At first, especially coming directly from the MGS1 VR missions, this is a bit weird. Abstract points makes it harder to understand when the game is nudging you a certain way at first, it makes the game’s subtle suggested routes a little less tangible, but eventually you get it. This move to a high-scoring system from a time one is important, not right now, but soon.

This game does the same thing as the last where a different character will congratulate you depending on your score, though it has a lot more of those sorts of moments where, like, you try a mission over and over and over again grinding to pull off this one strategy you found, finally you nail it with no mistakes, right away you hear the second best voice, in the case of the Snake missions it’s Olga, you get this moment of “FUCK I could’a done that faster!?”.

“You know what you’re doing.”

 In the last game you had a timer on-screen so you could read yourself before finishing whether or not you got the best score because score was time, but here it’s always a surprise reserved for the end. So instead of just continuing onto the next level, the minor disappointment, the fact that the current stage is immediately familiar to you, you’ve invested yourself in it temporarily, you’re better incentivized to try again for that better score right away. I mean, otherwise when you do eventually come back to it, you’ll have to waste a bunch of time re-learning it, so why not just try again now?

Tie that to the design of most of the levels in this game actually having multiple possible best routes unlike the last, you’ve got yourself the sort of game that you’ll want to progressively play more completely. Meaning, like, you’ll get the highscore on every level before moving on to the next, not that it forces you to, just that it makes the most sense to do it in that way. Think like, Angry Birds or any other level based mobile game you’ve played. Say what you will about mobile games dragging you deep down into addiction and conditioning you to make microtransactions, but in a game that you’ve already paid full price for, this is exactly what you want, this is good design. You’re getting your money’s worth out of a thing like this.

“Congrats Snake!”


All in all there aren’t that many more levels in this game than the last, but it's the way it ingeniously expands them that makes it so replayable and trains you to get better. As you go on you unlock new characters, each of which has their own special goofy levels about things like protecting a high value curry from waves of hungry enemies, whatever, but otherwise each one can be seen as a harder mode than the last.

In the Eliminate All version of Sneaking Mode, each character has the same stages to go through. New in this game though is the option to nonlethally eliminate dudes, whether by knockouts or by tranquilizing. Thing is, you never start with the tranq gun, so if you wanna get that oh so sweet non-lethal bonus at the end of a level, you first have to find it. Raiden is like the easy mode, the tranq gun always spawns right next to him so you can pick it up right away and proceed through the stage as you normally would. When playing the Snake however the gun will be further away, meaning you have to be careful not to be spotted or accidentally kill anyone before finding it and picking it up. Same goes for the Pliskin stages where the tranquilizer is even further away, often in areas under patrol by enemies. It’s a neat simple change that allows the difficulty of the elimination stages to continue to gradually ramp up across many rehashes of the same areas.

It’s very similar for the standard sneaking levels too. Just enough changes so that different characters AKA difficulty modes will require you to take additional steps to unravel an alert-free run. For example, in this level with the books, the best solution as Snake requires you to plant a few of them as distractions for the guards, but when playing as Raiden, an easier mode, you don’t need to use any of the books at all to get first place.

“Nice work.”

Aside from some levels that just hold no water at all, *cough cough* the grenade ones, and aside from the disappearance of some of the goofier more experimental stages like mystery, the VR missions in MGS2 are a great sequel to the VR missions in MGS1, I’d say more so than MGS2’s story is to MGS1, but aaay that’s just my opinioniro. Sure, maybe the variety missions are all garbage, and maybe the shooting weapons stages are crap because some dude thought it was a good idea to use pressure sensitivity to distinguish between aiming and firing with a single button, and maybe there’s a bunch of 1st person modes that aren’t even worth playing, I didn’t even record them, maybe, maybe, maybe all that yeah. But hey, the core of the experience, the sneaking missions, the advanced missions, eliminate all, those, those more than make up for all of it. These are where MGS2 shows the logical progression of ideas introduced in MGS1, I would say hard to argue, better than the story. You want stealth action gameplay? Forget the story, look no further than these my dude.



And then here’s ya boi finishes MGS3, thinkin aaaaay I can’t wait to unlock those VR missions, they’re gonna be so cool in this game with all the new systems it introduces like camouflage, suppressor degradation and freaking close-quarters-punch-em-arounds. So I unlock the theater mode and I’m treated to this cool looking playable scene-select and I’m thinking maaan, okay, this is cool, this must be the same environment the extra missions are gonna be in, like some sort of weird 60’s spy flick film world, sick. So I figure there must be some extra requirement to unlock it, looking around and you can only imagine my disappointment to discover that Metal Gear Solid 3 didn’t have any VR missions.

And then MGS4, ouf it’s the same sad story… and Metal Gear Solid 5? Well at this point we were so far gone that they wouldn’t have made any sense anyhow.


In 3 and 4 all you have is this single massive campaign, this one story that sees you travel all around the place doing stealth action combat in various environments. You’ve got deep infiltrations, relaxed exploration, boss fights and even some set pieces. All of these elements related to one another in some sequence which ends with a single score for all of it. You want a stealth bonus? Oh, well this isn’t a 5 to 10 second level, this is a 5 to 10 hour one, so if you want to get that bonus you’ve gotta commit to that pure stealth playstyle the whole time.

Knowing that everything you do in every section amounts to this one final score, that you can’t just replay a specific part over and over again to improve it later, knowing this kind of bothers me a lot, drives me into very specific, often not even fun, types of play that really ruin the experience. I’m not saying the systems or mechanics or story of these games is bad, all-in-all they’re really good packages, top level AAA experiences, but what I’m saying is that they could definitely be structured better. In fact, I’d say that the way 3 and 4 are layed out don’t do any good for the gameplay systems we’ve got here, they don’t do it justice. There’s so much possibility but barely anything is used to its full potential because story takes the front seat.

I think what happened was that after MGS2, the series started taking itself way too seriously. I wouldn't be at all surprised if it turned out that MGS3 didn’t include any sort of VR or additional missions because story was the new priority and nobody could find a way to contextualize these mechanically focused missions disconnected from the real world in a game who’s plot now took us to the 1960s. MGS1 made a few references to virtual combat training for soldiers, and that’s how the VR missions fit into that world. MGS2 made them canon by explicitly stating that Raiden, rookie player 2 actually trained for special forces in the VR missions from Metal Gear Solid 1, tying it neatly to the game’s themes and among a few other hot drops, making it clear that Raiden was meant less to be a character and more to be a proxy for the audience, the players of the game and its prequel.

But MGS3, this James Bond inspired jumbo cheese wagon, the fuck they gonna do? Nothing, so story took priority, no extra missions. What you have is just the main game, no extra room for creativity in self-contained levels.

MGS4? Well they could’a done something but I guess at this point they didn’t care. You do have a VR mode but it’s just a glorified weapon testing arena, you know, to get used to bullet damage from different guns at different ranges and get better at killing people in the main game, you know, the thing that the game actually penalizes you for. And the academy award for the most backwards-ass thing goes to this!

It’s just, it’s a bummer that the series never went back to this design that I think suited it much better.

Long time fan of the series, here’s what I think MGS is, or, here’s how I think it works best:
Metal Gear Solid is best when its a game where you start from somewhere and try to get to a goal in time while dealing with multiple hazards. At the end of each of these levels you’re scored in such a way that invites replays and suggests that maybe there’s an alternate route or tactic or solution that works better. The score favors speed, but preservation, or or most efficient / effective use of resources and stealth are also part of the equation, along with any other measurable indications of skill that may otherwise cost time. After all, that’s what the score should be, a reflection of the skill a player must have had in order to complete it in such a way. Yeah, sometimes more skillful play actually takes more time, so these sorts of things should be considered by the score system.

As the levels go on, some new and some rehashed versions of old, it gets harder and harder to complete them with full stealth, but it’s okay because nothing is set in stone. Multiple replays allow you to optimize your attempts, get better and better, figure out what the game expects of you and meets these expectations.

And… that’s why Peace Walker is my favorite Metal Gear Solid game. Peace Walker is as close as we’ll ever get to a full MGS game in the structure of the VR missions, and it’s evidence of exactly how much better everything can be as a result.

As a consequence of a release on a portable console, the story had to be split up into bite-sized missions with clear objectives. Typically, its simple get from point A to point B, but do so without being spotted, without killing anyone, without overusing resources and of course, without wasting time as you’ll get high rank at the end.

Better than the long drawn out stories, these very gamey missions get across the themes of the series much better. One of the things each Metal Gear Solid tries to do is have its players avoid killing because war is bad. How has this been done in the past? Well you have that final codename you get at the end, but its so distant it doesn’t even matter at the immediate moment. In MGS3 you have the ghost river sequence where you see the souls of all of the enemies you’ve killed so far, spooky, tries to make you feel bad. Not to discredit it, it does, but this has almost nothing to do with the gameplay. You feel bad for killing characters in the game’s world, but as a player you don’t feel guilty for killing npcs getting in the way of your stealth run. You see what I’m saying? There’s a disconnect. This scene, while doing a bit of both lets be fair, ultimately is thematically shaming you more than it is mechanically. MGS4 has a similar stilted, though much less in-your-face approach. If uh, if you killed too many people in a row your character will stop drop and vomit all over the floor because what you’re doing, all the killing? Its disgusting. You get it? It’s bad! What you’re doing is bad boso!

Peace Walker, the spin-off game you’re supposed to play on the bus? Okay, so get this, storytime: killing is bad and ruins your life, badabing. But hey, if you don’t kill people you’ll get a better score in a few minutes once this mission is over. And heeeey, speaking of when this mission ends, that’s when you’ll go back to your base which over the course of this game you’ll be trying to build up and strengthen. Wouldn’t it be great if instead of killing people out in the field, you knocked them out, strapped a balloon to em and sent em off flying to be recruited into your army? That’d be pretty sick nah?

Instead of expecting players not to kill people because of a stretch goal a good few hours out of reach and maybe one or two subtle hints that killing is bad, Peace Walker has constant incentives not to kill. Not only will it negatively impact your mission rank, but a dead enemy soldier is worth less than a living one because 1) you’ve got a base to look after and you can’t recruit a murder victim, and 2) other guards won’t be suspicious of a body on the ground marking your handiwork if the body’s not on the ground any more.

Peace Walker also mitigates context sensitive equipment uses preventing players from experimenting with different strategies by means of the loadout screen at the beginning of each mission that allows you to bring whatever you want in. You don’t have to worry about running out because you’ll be re-stocked by the next mission once you return to base. You can of course call in supply drops if you want, but just like saving ammo in the VR missions got you bonuses, doing this, abusing of your supplies reduces your score. Another example of ludo narrative and narrative shaking hands like best fucking friends: the game sees calls for extra supplies as a sign of lack of skill in a player, but in the story it's explained that your soldiers look up to you as their leader so constantly getting yourself stuck and needing to call home for help, that makes them look down upon you.

Contrast that against MGSV by the way that doesn’t even bother with this crap but instead just tells you in a menu that if you call in certain support your max rank will be limited. Screw that.

I could go on and on but Peace Walker is the only game in the series that fully utilizes every mechanic to its full potential in a way that’s contextually safe. You’re not on a single big mission this time, you run a private military company, you take missions from clients all around, some more important than others. But this allows for the return of goofy but challenging gimmick missions. For instance, you can unlock a banana as a weapon, and some missions force you to use it to hold up enemies from behind who can’t tell what you’re holding and think its a gun. So you’ve got these cool perfect stealth hold-up missions that force you to familiarize yourself with that mechanic and are funny as hell, then you’ve got your more standard affair where you’re traveling around rescuing prisoners of war, all while trying not to be seen. Next you’ll be shooting down people in balloons in a sort of minigame, and then before you know it you’re fighting these massive freaking robots all geared up and ready to rumble.

This game borrows the core of the VR missions. You’ve got these great challenges that teach and grade you on the spot, on freaking demand, but they do it instead of in a virtual, sterile world of abstract geometry and pixels, in the luscious green environments of South America and the cold dark corners of secret military bases. A story is still told and it's done so through these amazing graphic-novel style animated interactive scenes but also seamlessly in the middle of gameplay. The game still pulls all sorts of third-wall breaking tricks on you based on the fact that it’s now level based, which is funny as hell. It lets you sneak around, it lets you go guns blazing, it lets you replay levels without worrying about how you’ll affect your final score, and most importantly of all, it lets you do all of this with others players online! Not only does this just make the game more fun, but some elements of the game are restricted to use in multiplayer only and require real teamwork to accomplish. This, man this is a big deal.

Now listen, don’t get me wrong. I trashed MGS3 a bit earlier but what I think I should clear up is that MGS3 is the best at the format its going for. When it comes to long-form MGS missions, MGS3 is the one that allows for the greatest experimentation and variety and also nudges you away just enough from dominant strats with things like suppressor health. It’s great, MGS3 does the best job at being the worst of the two types of structures MGS games have.

The second, the better one, the mission based one, the one exclusive to MGS1 VR, MGS2 VR, Portable Ops if ya got em, Peace Walker and even Ground Zeroes, that’s where the kid leads the pack. Please continue not to get me wrong, Peace Walker is not perfect, it’s got some gunk in its eyes, the difficulty spike on bosses is a bit steep, they’re kinda bullet spongy and really force you to make some friends. But otherwise this is the best the series gets as a video game. This is the only Metal Gear Solid outside of 5 that took a big leap, and it’s the only one that landed gracefully. This little PSP game has more content in it than big daddy 5, and while that in and of itself is a big deal, what’s a bigger deal is how much more polished it is, how much more consistent it is, how better it takes advantage of its structure.

Like I said earlier, worst parts of MGS5 are when it tries being open world, the best parts are where it goes linear, emulating that one-by-one mission structure, in, out, you’re done. This, it came from Ground Zeroes’ mission style format, which itself came from Peace Walker. So what we’ve got now is that MGS5’s worst parts are where it’s its own and its best parts are a shallow copy of Peace Walker.

Metal Gear Solid is best when it’s mission-based, and the best mission-based Metal Gear Solid is Peace Walker, and so that, that’s why Peace Walker is the best Metal Gear Solid.

Perfect Dark

If you were to ask most people what their favorite first-person-shooter game on the N64 was, most would answer GoldenEye, a game with the backing of the familiarity of the James Bond IP, being based on the 1995 film of the same title.

A smaller subset of those asked would likely mention another game, Perfect Dark. Now the interesting thing is that of those who say they like GoldenEye, most have either never played or never even heard of Perfect Dark, whereas those who have played it almost always point to it instead.

Nobody who’s played both games doesn’t prefer Perfect Dark. Why’s that? Well because Perfect Dark is what GoldenEye would be if it were finished. Sadly though, GoldenEye is the game that everyone remembers, its the one that nostalgia favors. James Bond has always had the public’s support, and so of course it aided in driving the popularity of the game. Much like Blade Runner though from which this game draws inspiration, it initially had a murky reception, it failed to market itself effectively. Many have begun creating retrospectives on Perfect Dark, including Edge, and most agree that it has stood the test of time.

17 years since its release however, many gamers don’t even know about, people seem uninterested in it for some reason. So today we aim to give Perfect Dark the recognition it deserves as a truly innovative piece of software and as an impressively well produced piece of entertainment, comparing it against GoldenEye, then we’ll discuss some of the driving forces behind its low sales, and after that we’ll finish with some final thoughts about its impact on gaming.

Now before we begin, just want to address one thing. The footage you’ll be seeing throughout this video comes from emulated gameplay. Aside from being able to capture it at a higher resolution, there are some other reasons I captured footage this way. Yes though, I own a copy of the game, and yes, I have an N64 expansion pak. We’ll talk about why I’m playing like this more in the second part of the video though. The only reason I’m pointing it out now is that you may observe some graphical issues from time to time, as well as a lack of lense flares that were originally featured in the game. This is a result of the emulation, so, just wanted to clear that up.



So for those of you who don’t know, Perfect Dark was made by the same people who made GoldenEye and is in many ways a spiritual successor to it. As a matter of fact it began its life as another James Bond game. The designers however had grown tired of James Bond and the restrictions it implied. Losing the bid for the licensed game ended up allowing them to pursue more creative ideas they had, and you can tell by the end credits that they really really enjoyed themselves. This project was their baby.

Game

So earlier I said that Perfect Dark is what GoldenEye would be if it were finished. That wasn’t entirely true though. Not only does Perfect Dark do everything that GoldenEye does but better through extension, it also adds new features and mechanics into the base that was established with the James Bond game.

They had already produced the go to fps, where do you go from there? One of the first thoughts was to change the primary gameplay element of the game, the shooting, by adding secondary functions to each weapon in the game, essentially doubling the actions available to players. This was something that just wouldn’t have made sense in a James Bond world. They came up with many interesting ideas for weapons and gadgets, it became very technology focused, so somewhere down the line the creative direction focused on sci-fi. The plot revolved around aliens, secret conspiracies, AIs, super weapons, assassinations, etc.

The developers from all disciplines were given total creative freedom, they produced everything in-house, from writing and voice acting to music and motion capture. Just after the game was planned out a large portion of the team left, making the development environment even looser, especially when new employees were brought in, finally outnumbering the team that worked on GoldenEye by triple and creating a space where creativity could just run rampant. 

As one developer put it, “people would just do things they thought were cool and would work”, they were building things in a “non-production led environment”, there was no schedule, there were no managers, even the team leader got appointed that position sort of randomly as a result of everyone leaving. If this game hadn't had so much of its behavioral assets copied over from GoldenEye, and if they hadn’t already outlined the creative vision of the product, this probably would have been the end of it.


Single Player Missions

So let’s talk about the singleplayer missions. Unlike modern FPS game levels that are kind of play-as-you-go, mostly having forward progression be the main challenge, each level of Perfect Dark was like a puzzle to solve, with guns. Mission were paired with briefings you could optionally read for clues as well as a list of objectives that needed to be completed. Rather than just following objective markers or walking a straight path, you’d drop into a place and have stuff to do. You’d have to complete these objectives, sometimes in any desired order, before completing the level.

The game’s levels were, as a result, very trial and error based. Often times you’d do something accidentally and watch the game tell you that you failed an objective, prompting you to restart. However, what was really cool was that it didn’t just end the level then and there, as a matter of fact the only way to reach a gameover screen was to run out of health. No, even after failing a mission, the game allowed you to stay in the level, exploring and completing other objectives, just unable to win. So it’s not falsely difficult or anything, I mean every objective solution is hinted at well enough that you really have no one to blame but yourself for failing, but even if you do, the game still allows you to continue and prepare yourself for your next attempt.

Unlike reset difficulty systems like reset-platforming or dark souls slowly incrementing progression with resets, allowing you to peek ahead at what the game has in store mitigates the frustration felt by the player. When you accidentally kill a mission critical character, you didn’t just fail, you learned. Learning is progression, so you didn’t just take a step backwards like you would have if this were an FPS like COD, but you took a step forward towards your understanding of what it takes to complete this level.

Now, for these sorts of puzzle elements to fit into the game, objective statuses needed to be clearly presented to the player. If you fail, the game makes it very clear that you won’t be able to finish it. Even when you make a mistake unknowingly, for example using an item before its time. For instance, in this one level you’re given some explosive weapons. Ahead, they’re needed to blow up a wall, but if you’ve already spent their ammo, the game is able to recognize your inability to progress and it tells you that you’ve failed.


Now, assuming you’ve played GoldenEye, some of this might sound familiar to you. While it’s true that Bond’s missions were similarly structured, including various objectives to complete, it when we look at the finer details where we realize how unpolished it is. Take for instance a similar situation to that grenade thing. In the second level of GoldenEye, the game asks you make contact with a buddy and then blow up these containers of poison gas. Seeing in the intro of the game how it’s supposed to be done, I knew I would need to use the mines that were provided me. So of course, I wasted all of my mines at the start of the level, and alas, the game never told me I failed. I even killed this dude who apparently I was supposed to meet up with, and the game never informed me of my mistake. Then a firefight ensued. These containers can be destroyed by bullets, but the game doesn’t give you enough time to blow them all up this way while under fire before the leaking gas kills you.

I made two critical mistakes here and the game never told me. If your game is going to ask you to do trial and error, it kind of needs to let you know when you’ve goofed. That’s why I’m saying it feels unfinished. The mission objective system isn’t necessarily broken, I mean technically it works on some level, it just isn’t polished and isn’t finished. Perfect Dark then takes this concept and completes it. Sure, they’re the same thing, one just included a status notification system that makes it useable and presentable.


Difficulty

Now, another thing that Perfect Dark very interestingly is difficulty. Most games these days, especially shooters all employ the same sort of difficulty system. The harder a setting you select, the more health enemies have and the less you have. Bullets hurt them less and hurt you more, that’s it.

Some more ambitious games pair this to reward systems that depend on player performance like RE4, and others try to avoid preset easy, medium and hard modes altogether by using fully dynamic and automated difficulty systems. Most recently, MGSV tried to do this. Enemies in the early game will get new equipment based on the tactics you employ. If you use a lot of smoke grenades, they’ll wear gas mask, etc. However in the long term, this system proved to be too robust and poorly designed to actually impact player behavior. To goal was to force the player to modify their playstyle based on enemy countermeasures… but then enemies started being able have all of their special equipment at once… and then they gave the player a way to disrupt shipments of that equipment very easily, essentially stripping the enemies clean and wasting all of the tens of thousands of man-hours spent developing this system.

All this is to say that even today, difficulty settings and systems are things that a lot of people either put no effort into, or design so poorly they might as well have put no effort into.


Now, I didn’t actually know how Perfect Dark handled difficulty until I came to the Chicago level in a playthrough. Chicago is this really small level with tons of little puzzles to solve within it, it all takes place on the corner of this dark dreary street. So I began the level, made it past some dudes, checked my objectives and took note of an interesting looking one, “create a vehicular diversion”, hmm. So eventually I spot this Limo, I figured that must be the vehicle I have to use. I also noticed that this huge invincible laser shooting drone passes by it, so I figured there must be some puzzle to solve here. So I observed the limo for a bit and noticed that after a while, it takes off and flies away. After doing the first objective which was to collect some equipment in a sewer, noticed I was given a mine. I knew that my end goal was to enter the parking garage for a building nearby and wondered if placing the mine on the limo and then waiting for it to leave before detonating would allow access into the garage, but it didn’t look like that’s where the limo headed. Then I thought that since the drone passes by the limo, maybe this goal is to blow up the limo as it’s close, destroying them both. This solution was solidified when I noticed a sewer pipe with hole right under the limo, the perfect place to plant an explosive without anyone noticing. So I tried this, but then nothing happened.

I got really confused here, just thinking of all of the possible ways to use that limo, but I couldn’t figure out what the diversion was supposed to be. So I caved and googled it. Perfect Dark Limo Puzzle. So I started reading a guide and realized no, the diversion is done using the taxi instead, which I would have figured out if I had just walked closer to it. So what you do is you hack the taxi which makes it fly off and crash into the drone. But something wasn’t right, the limo had really interesting behavior to just be decore, I was curious what role it played in the mission, if any.

So I scrolled down a bit on the page and saw a whole other guide for the difficulty mode one higher than mine. I got confused, I just kind of assumed that difficulty in this game would be like the typical fps affair, stronger bullets and weaker armor. But then I noticed that other objectives were listed, and then I got very very interested.

So yes, the game does do the normal increased damage stuff as well as improving the quality of the enemy AIs, making combat more challenging, but it also adds new harder objectives to the game as well. After all, the game isn’t just about shooting, it’s about being a spy, so a harder mode shouldn’t just make it harder to kill people, it should make your job as a secret agent more challenging. You have more stuff to do, more trial and error to complete. By the time you’re able to beat a level, you know it inside and out.

Additionally, the game’s harder modes included different enemy placement and security cameras, tied together well with the additional mission objectives. Now that you have more things to do, enemies and traps are placed differently along your path.

Take the first mission for example, which for the record across the 3 difficulty modes goes from 1 objective to 4 and then 5, but anyways, the final objective unlocked, Download the Project Files, is a really interesting that shows how the additional objectives and increased mechanical difficulty aren’t independent but work together. So the idea here is that there’s a computer you need to access to download some files. To get in, you need a password. So you go around the level until you hear a dude on a phone call talking about the files you need. So you wait for him to get off the call, hold him up, and then he freaks out and runs off looking for guards. Now I love this mission and I’m a pro, but if you didn’t already kill all of the guards in the building, you’ll fail the mission here. So then you get him and walk him to the computer where he needs to log in for you. As you’ll notice, I’m passing by many destroyed security cameras. Again, that’s because I’m a pro and already shot them, but if you didn’t know to take out the cameras ahead of time, turning these corners would set off an alarm, spawning more guards and failing the mission. So then you get to the computer and tell him to log in. Here I goofed. I wasn’t really sure what I needed to do, so I just waited until suddenly I was told I failed the objective. Turns out the scrub deleted the files I needed, sonamagun. So after restarting, I listened to the phonecall more carefully and realized he mentioned that he was about to go delete the files. So the trick here is wait till he says “all right, I’m in”, then knock him out before he can delete the files.

This single objective gives you 4 points of failure. If you either forget to take out all the guards, forget to take out all of the cameras, wait too long to knock him out, or just kill him too early accidentally, you’ll fail this mission goal and be unable to finish the level.

Now, these two things, increasing base enemy bullet damage and adding more complex objectives, these are both ideas introduced and implemented minimally in GoldenEye. Aside from not updating the player on the statuses of their objectives, GoldenEye’s objectives just weren’t able to be as complex as Perfect Dark’s due to the lack of voice acting. This whole event with the phonecall guy, this would have been impossible in GoldenEye.

There’s another one also on a mission in a tanker ship, the one that features Miyamotto as the first guard. Oh yeah, did I mention that all of the faces in the game were made from scans of people involved in the game’s production? Yeah. So on medium difficulty, you have to turn off the ship’s GPS or something, so you go to where that is and there are 3 pilots operating a circular machine. So you hold them up. If you walk up to one of them, you can command them to turn off the thing. But you’ve gotta be smarter than me for a minute. This is a game that’s been designed by people with an intended challenge in mind. Why would they put 3 pilots in this room instead of just one? Well I’ll tell you why. As soon as the one you pick begins deactivating the GPS, another will pull out a gun, screaming and calling them traitors before trying to kill them before they can do it. When this happens, you have to kill him before he takes them both out. As long as one is still alive, you can still shut down the thing and complete the objective. Alternative, if you’re smart, you could just kill two and use the last one to shut it off.

So the objectives aren’t harder and more complex than GoldenEyes, but they’re coupled to the harder combat. That’s not all though, Perfect Dark does two other things with objectives that are unique to it from ya boi 007.


Some easy mode mission objectives change drastically depending on your difficulty setting, for instance in Area 51 Rescue where you have to obtain and use a lab technician disguise. On easy mode it’s kind of given to you as soon as you enter the lab area, but on harder difficulties you need to sneak around in your normal clothes for a while before finding it elsewhere. Even your available methods for entering the lab change.

So that’s one change, previous objectives you’ve once completed on lower difficulties now have different solutions.

Also though, and this blew my mind, but the way in which you solve certain puzzles or complete certain tasks can impact events in the preceding stages.

On the airbase stage, your final goal is to reach airforce one with the stewardess disguise. Depending on how you entered the plane at the end of the level, you’ll either start the next stage, Airforce One, in the middle level of the plane or in the cargo bay. I crawled in from the landing gear, so I started in the cargo. I did this because in this room there’s a hoverbike, and if you lower the bike before completing the mission, you get to use it in the next mission after the plane crashes, which is extremely useful as it allows you to get around the place much faster and avoid confrontations with enemies. The downside to starting from down here is that in the first room down is the only member of the flight crew who’s able to recognize your disguise and alert the guards to your presence. Starting from the middle allows you to avoid that guy and go straight to your first objective which is to locate the president… but here’s the catch, that only works on easy mode.

See, on the medium mode of the airbase level, there’s a metal detector that will ruin your mission if you walk through it with all of your guns and the recording that you need to give the president. So halfway through the stage you have to put all of your guns in a briefcase, put it on a conveyor belt and then make a mad dash to the security system room to knock out the dudes there and turn off the luggage scanner before your case gets caught. So unlike easy mode, you start the next mission on the plane without any equipment. You briefcase with the evidence inside is in the cargo bay, so now that entry point becomes the one that makes more sense to use.

There are many really interesting points in the game like these, these really cool and complex objectives that impact future levels, so to avoid spoilers I’m not going to talk about any others. You really need to try this game for yourself.

Co-op and asynchronous multiplayer

So by this point you should already understand how Perfect Dark didn’t only polish up a lot of GoldenEye’s single player elements but also expanded upon them.

What if I told you though that the expansion doesn’t end there. What if I told you that the single player wasn’t actually singleplayer at all?

Perfect Dark, released in 2000, has a campaign that is playable in a total of 4 different ways. You can play it alone, like you’re seeing here, but you can also play it co-operatively with a friend in split-screen, the entire game. Suffice to say that at the time not many FPS implemented features like this so seamlessly. Now here’s the really really cool part. Even if you didn’t have a buddy, you could still play co-op with an AI controlled partner. That’s what you’re seeing footage of here. Also, for your information, this is Velvet Dark, the basic partner for co-op, but there are other you can unlock if you care.

9 years before RE5 came out, Perfect Dark implemented a co-op campaign system better than it. As you should remember, one of the biggest issues with RE5 was the mandatory AI partner which was a nuisance and got in the way during missions. Playing alone gave you added responsibilities because the partner was crap.

In this game though, the campaign was designed with single player in mind but could optionally be played with a partner. And instead of being a pain to look after, the AI partner was given special abilities, making playing with them a different experience from playing with a human friend. It can do melee attacks that the player can’t do, it can roll and dodge enemy attacks, it’s crazy. So it’s not just the same partner but AI controller, it behaves completely differently. Also, the partner’s behavior can be toggled between aggressive and defensive, just like RE5, but more interestingly, some of the other partners you can unlock have entirely different behavior. I like Velvet though cause she’s guard-like, she has no fears, she’s a straight up cold blooded predator.

So that’s 3 ways the campaign’s missions can be played. Alone, co-operatively with a friend or co-operatively with an AI.

The 4th way that yes, the entire game is playable in, is something that they called counter-operatively. Perfect Dark actually coined this term, the opposite of co-op, and sadly it’s a term that we never really hear much today because nobody does it. In 2000, Rare built a game that featured an asymmetrical 2 player challenge mode, literally the whole idea behind the WiiU.

So in counter-operative, as the word suggests, one player plays the game’s protagonist with the goal of completing the mission’s objectives while the other takes control of random enemies around the level and is tasked with killing their friend. Whatever weapons or equipment the enemy they’ve possessed has, that’s all they have at their disposal, as well as a suicide pill which allows them to give up their current body and take over another. It turns the missions into intense 1v1 fights between one heavily armed and powered character trying to complete a scavenger hunt versus another weaker opponent with multiple lives.

I’m sorry by the way, the footage of this stuff is pretty bad, so you’ll just have to use your imagination for some of these things. I speak from experience though, my brother and I used to play this mode a lot as kids.

The challenge isn’t super shallow or one sided though, obviously giving the opposing character so many attempts seems imbalanced. So if player 1 actually manages to kill all enemies in the area, leaving non left for player 2 to assume the roles of, a new enemy is spawned all the way at the beginning of the level and the opposing player needs to make their way aaaaaaall the way to where the protagonist is before being able to engage them again, giving the first player a feeling of being hunted but a bit of a break between the action.

That is of course if you play that mode competitively. See, counter-operative can totally be played co-operatively, and that’s what my brother and I used to do a lot. I would be the counter-operative but I’d play it like a secret agent. I’d move ahead, disguised as an enemy, relaying intel to my brother who would later storm the area as I assisted him by taking out my fellow guards alongside him. It was really cool that you could play this way, I mean, it’s not like this wasn’t an intended use case, why else would friendly fire on enemies be featured in the game. They must have known kids would do this. It was a really cool mode that nobody, I mean nobody does anymore, with like the exception of those Nintendo Land mini games and one of the RE5 dlc mercenaries modes.


Multiplayer

Now, at the beginning of this video I started with a question about GoldenEye. The thing about it though is that despite it have a fairly long story mode, the aspect of the game that everyone remembers is the multiplayer. I’m willing to take a bet that in your eyes GoldenEye is probably the definitive 4 player first-person-shooter shooter party mode experience for the N64. As with everything else though, a fresh look at it reveals how minimal and unfinished it really was as well as how far Perfect Dark was able to take it.

You in unnecessary addition to the entire mission list being playable multiple multiplayer ways, Perfect Dark didn’t just contain a 4 player mode similar to GoldenEye but, you know, with all of its mechanical extensions like secondary weapon functions and gadgets and stuff. No, Perfect Dark didn’t do that, it included a 16 player multiplayer suite with tons of modifications and preset game types available.

You see, a big part of Perfect Dark’s development went into character AI. In goldenEye, most of the enemy characters had extremely simple behavior. They would often either hold their ground and fire or walk directly towards you and attack, using some basic pathfinding techniques to traverse the mission stages and follow the player, their target. This sort of AI worked well for the game’s missions but couldn’t be adapted or ported into the multiplayer mode. The sorts of AI logic you need for that sort of combat situation are very different from those in the main game, that’s why you could only play multiplayer with other human players.

For Perfect Dark, a better and more intelligent AI system was produced, not only for multiplayer but for missions as well. I mean aside from really intelligent AI spawning throughout levels, always keeping you on your toes, the actual behavior of the bots had a lot of effort spent on it.

In the multiplayer mode titled Combat Simulator, which unlike goldeneye could be accessed even when a single controller was plugged in, bots, named simulants, a nice little nod to Blade Runner, could be added to a match and would behave properly no matter the type. From deathmatch to capture the flag and all other unlockable modes in between, the sims interacted with each other and human players within the context of a game’s rules and objectives.

Now using a word simulant to describe your multiplayer bots in a game that has Perfect in the title might sound a little bit cocky. At the end of the day they’re really just canon fodder right? They’re like an optional buffer included to speed up chemical reactions between between players right? Well it would be if the simulant behavior had a single depth level.

So yeah, you can select the difficulty of each sim in a match from the list of meatsim, easysim and normalsim. This choice affects things like their reaction time, their accuracy and they’re decision making when it comes to selecting weapons. Oh yeah did I mention that the developers designed all weapons to have advantages and disadvantages when compared to other weapons like a giant game of rock paper scissors with 35 options times 2 because of secondary functions, I mean even the freaking karate chops have another functionality as a disarm, yo this game is bananas! Like, okay, I know I haven’t spent a single point talking just about how interesting secondary weapon functions are, but that’s because it would basically boil down to me just citing a bunch of examples of all the cool and unique gun abilities, effectively spoiling a bunch of the game’s gameplay, because like it’s cool to get a new gun and figure out what it does, but also because I feel like just saying “hey every gun actually does two things not one okay bye” is kind of sufficient to get my point accross, primarily because even today I can’t think of a single other game where EVERY GUN is actually TWO GUNS, and like, sometimes completely unrelated guns. You freaking walk up to a dude and you see he’s holding the dragon assault rifle, but you don’t know what mode he’s got it in. Does he have it in regular rapid fire mode? Or does he have it in proximity-mine mode and is he about to throw it at you like a grenade. NO JOKE this one gun can be used 3 ways, you can shoot people, you can throw it at them like a bomb, or you can drop it somewhere only for someone to blow up when they try to pick it up.

Sorry, I said I wouldn’t do it, I did it, I hate myself, well, I already did.

So the base difficulty is only your first choice when it comes to setting up a sim. Your second choice though is behavior. Rather than being in a bot match with a bunch of generic enemies, you can choose what sort of personality you’d like them to have, and the ones available make the game really really interesting.

So for instance you’ve got the Prey sim who will only attack enemies that are at a disadvantage. It’ll hunt down people who are at low health and no shields, have just respawned or have a worse gun than it does. Then to counter that you’ve got the Judge sim who’s all about punishing players who exhibit Prey like behavior, including actual Prey sims but also human players who act like them. Focusing your attention on the weak will land the judges eye on you. A really fun one in Venge sim who will always place a target on the back of whichever player last killed it, stopping at nothing until it’s killed them or it’s been killed, making you kind of weary to attack it. It actually won’t pull the trigger on anyone other than its last killer. A modified version of this is the Feud sim who picks a single enemy randomly at the beginning of the game and focuses its efforts on killing them and only them throughout the entire duration of the match, ignoring other objectives but defending itself when necessary. And there are also ones that aren’t offensive, my favorite being the Peace sim who’s goal is to slow down the fight for everyone. It frequently evades enemies but if attacked will try to disarm players and leave with their guns, then moving on to collect other guns and ammo around the stage before anyone else can. The cool thing is that if you manage to kill a Peace sim, well happy birthday dude you get to take all of the stuff it's been stockpiling.

There are a bunch of really interesting sim personalities available and they all add a lot to the combat simulator when playing alone, but also make playing with friends much more fun. Also I you can issue commands to them when in teams. It’s like, it’s really good. It goes above and beyond what you need for a game like this.

I apologize, the footage here won’t reflect what I’m saying, but in the same way that GoldenEye was a lot of people’s go-to multiplayer game, Perfect Dark was ours at my house. I remember once specifically all the cousins came over for a name day, you see Greeks do this really weird thing where they hold parties on the days meant to celebrate saints if anyone in the family has either a first or middle name matching that saint. They also do this weird thing where they name children after their parents and use other family member names for middle names, so often you share a name day with like half of your family. Like, I’ll get a phone call from my dad randomly and he’ll be like happy name day for your middle name! And I’ll be like ooooh thanks! Happy name day for your first name! Like, that’s how bad it gets. When we were kids though and a nameday landed on a weekend, it was really just a reason to get together.

Anyways, I bring this up because imagine trying to play a game with like a million very loud and very violent mediterranean kids all amped up on sugar. Yo, just cause it says game over on the screen, doesn’t mean the fight is over holy crap. So anyways at this one party we were having some trouble with that, playing a couple of games and all the cousins biting at each other's throats. So then my brother has the great idea of pulling out perfect dark, plugging in four controllers and setting up a custom match of capture the flag, 4 humans against 4 sims.

That night we must have played Perfect Dark for hours. It was such a freaking blast, just taking turns and swapping out every match, changing up the weapons, which by the way unlike GoldenEye you had complete control over, it wasn’t just presets, and even voting on which types of sims should be in the next round. We’d always put the Feud sim in though and do this thing where we’d try to protect whichever one of us got selected as its target.

Like, yeah, it was a first-person-shooter, yeah it could fulfill a competitive player’s desires, it could also serve as a fun party game. The weapons were zainy, the game modes were team based, you could have everyone in the room on the same team, you could do 2 vs 2 with simulant team mates that each team would choose the behavior of, it was like, it was so complex, it was so accessible, modifiable, reusable, it was a banger of a game.

Honest to god, I think the most fun I’ve ever had with a game ever was with Perfect Dark. When I think of gaming memories, like, you say the word “games”, I have this image burned into my head from that night. We sitting here in this room, my brother’s old room, it looked very different at the time. It’s actually in the basement, we had just finished building it. The adults were upstairs where we had just come from eating cake and cookies and stuff. You could hear them talking very loudly up there. There was a tiny little TV on this night stand over here, the screen wasn’t any wider than the platform it was on. This isn’t the same model, but this is another small TV I have that I remember was about the same size. So all of the cousins, all of my siblings, everyone was in here, whether they were playing or not. I was around 10 years old, but everyone there was different ages. 4 people would be playing at a time, talking and coordinating with each other, some others were watching, and the others, my sisters for example were just chilling and talking. It was just like a really relaxed time. The memory I have is of myself laying on the ground around here, spread out, at the edge of the room, everyone else playing is sitting on the floor ahead of hunched over their controllers. One of my cousins was sitting on the ground near me, his back rested against my brother's bed. Like, a room full of kids huddled around a tiny screen just chilling, telling stories, passively playing Perfect Dark, that’s what I think of when I think of games.

Little did any of us know though that even over a decade later, few games would ever be created that could support the sort of experience we were having. No game I believe since Perfect Dark has ever been as complex, polished and focused while also offering as many different ways to play and have fun, at least not within the First-Person-Shooter genre.

That’s why I’m showing you today the N64 version of this game, not the Rare Replay remakes. At the time this version of this game was released, it was a good as it possibly could be. Perfect Dark on the N64 could not have possibly been any better given its environment and context. From hugely complex and well implemented game design decisions to little aesthetic things like being one of the first FPS games to have super detailed reloading animations, this game pushed not only its software and hardware to new performant limits, but it also appended and concatenated concepts and ideas to and between the definitions of the multiple genres it borrowed ideas from. “Let’s make probably the best AI within the context of games anyone has ever made up to this point! And then let’s scan people’s faces and put them in the game! And then let’s build puzzle and adventure game challenges into it and have players solve them through the interface of an FPS”.

Sadly though, despite all the innovating and genre redefinition they were doing, when the game finally came out, not many people were there to read their definitions. Maximizing the quality of their product within their given environmental constraints unfortunately wasn’t enough to fully mitigate the impacts of that environment.


Why didn’t Perfect Dark sell well?


After all this talk of how great Perfect Dark is, you’re probably wondering why you’ve never played or even heard of it, why you spent so much time playing goldeneye instead. That’s because truth be told, you didn’t have as much time to play Perfect Dark as you did GoldenEye. The game was released in 2000, just a year before the launch of the gamecube which occupied the attention of many Nintendo gamers. It’s because the game, unlike GoldenEye, was rated M for mature, your parents probably didn’t want to get it for you if you were my age at the time. I mean, the only reason I got to play it was because my brother had it. It’s probably because it was 2000 and the main playable character in the game was a woman, something that yeah, at the time you didn’t see all that much, especially non-overtly sexualized cases. One of the aesthetic things that the devs were proud of was giving the character changes of clothes depending on the mission. She basically never wears anything that a female James Bond wouldn’t.

This gets brought up in conversation about the game from time to time and I’m bringing it up because I think it deserves to be acknowledged. I mean, even as a young kid, often playing the player 2 to my brother’s player 1, I always thought that this Velvet Dark character was weird. I mean, Joana I could understand, but cultural stereotypes of the time made me wonder why a girl was in the game. These days things have changed, obviously for the better. I could only find one study on the impact of protagonist gender on the success of games that explicitly references Perfect Dark. It makes the conclusion that it doesn’t have a significant effect, but they didn’t actually use sales numbers, instead judging a game’s success on whether it had a sequel or not, which Perfect Dark did. When you look into it though, Perfect Dark Zero, the sequel they cite as an indication of success, a game that was not as subtle about their character being a girl, it sold even worse, not even making a million units. I don’t think that sort of reception can be considered a success.
(https://books.google.ca/books?id=SYEzMIBe57kC&pg=PT25&lpg=PT25&dq=perfect+dark+sales+female&source=bl&ots=d79OnsYtPe&sig=Gli4njilkjuyjjGaph9igTThWiA&hl=en&sa=X&sqi=2&ved=0ahUKEwit-56ok4LVAhWc2YMKHV0rDVgQ6AEIYzAL#v=onepage&q=perfect%20dark%20sales%20female&f=false)

It’s also because Perfect Dark, having the unpreceded and unmatched scope and vision that it did, was unable to run all of its processes on the 4 megabytes of Ram available on the N64. As a result, a consumer would need to purchase an N64 Ram Expansion Pak to be able to access the entire game. Without this, only a small, barebones version of the multiplayer was available. Despite the game’s content being so diverse and complex, offering tons of replay value and practically future-proofing itself, the way by which the game had to be accessed was not.

This is why the footage you’ve been seeing throughout this video comes from emulation.

Finding a first-party N64 Expansion Pak that’s unused and doesn’t cost hundreds of dollars these days is nye impossible. Third party ones are either a hit or a miss. You read ratings and reviews only to see people reporting tons of problems, in some cases claiming overheating and damage to their consoles. I currently am the proprietor of 2 N64s, but the expansion pak we used to use for Perfect Dark was sold many years ago, along with a lot of games we had. When I got my hands on a new copy, I forgot about the whole ram situation. I did manage to get one, not sure what the make is but I remember paying between 30 to 40 dollars Canadian. Here’s my problem though. From a preservationist stance, it would be wrong to even risk putting this thing in my N64. Like, it’s not like this thing is licensed by nintendo, it’s not like it was even manufactured while the N64 was still relevant. This is some cheap knock off. I’m heavily against doing anything to an old console that would have voided its warranty if it still applied.

Further, there’s another video production related risk I wasn’t comfortable making. As you might know, most old cartridge games save your game’s progress in volatile memory maintained by a battery. These batteries die though. Since so much of the stuff I wanted to talk about Perfect Dark was further into the game’s progression and at multiple difficulty levels, I wasn’t able to risk losing a save file during a couple of sessions of footage capture. I already found a copy of Pokemon Red that lost its memory, so I’ve seen this happen.

I mean, people discuss the ethics of emulation a lot, and in most cases I agree that it should be avoided. However, when there are risks involved in running the original version of a piece of software, when the hardware your software is stored on is actually volatile, constantly deteriorating, and when it’s been almost two decades since that piece of plastic and metal came out of a factory line, I don’t think there’s too much of an issue with emulating. I mean I own the game so that’s one thing, but even for someone who wants to go back and play the original version for the first time, I don’t think it’s ethically sound to tell them the only way they’re allowed to do so is by paying a higher price for a product that might already be non-functional and that might damage a historical piece of hardware just to run it.

Also remember that time Dunkey went all googoo gaga over that emulated version of goldeneye? Yo mapping standard modern FPS controls to this game holy hot banana is it something else.

But yeah, asking people to pay more money for a mandatory memory expansion to play a Mature game without a known character like James Bond just a year before a new console, that’s kind of sketch. Doesn’t matter how phenomenal your game is, you’re gonna take a blow for this. These are the reasons that goldeneye sold over 8 million copies whereas Perfect Dark sold just over 2 and a half, still, funnily enough more than the makers themselves expected it to.



SocioTechnical systems and influences on gaming


Now, what I think is the saddest thing about the game’s lackluster market performance is that it disallowed Perfect Dark from having the sort of impact on games and on the public that other, arguably objectively inferior games (like goldeneye), were able to have and did in fact have.


See the thing about games is that they aren’t just technology like my typical criticisms of them might imply I think they are, but they also aren’t just entertainment or media. You can’t compare games to a technology like a corkscrew which has a single intended purpose, games are huge things with influences coming towards and away from them in all directions.




Whether or not you believe it, games, automated or otherwise are Socio-Technical Systems. It’s easy not to look at them like this, and yes, it’s not required in criticism sometimes, but they are. Games have impacts various technological and societal entities as well as receive effects from them. Games and the industry that surrounds them aren’t self-contained, not all technologies that go into games are made in-house, the distribution and production of games is regulated for societal, political and cultural reasons, in some countries and eras more than others. Some governments, for example mine, subsidize game development. This is why it’s important to receive these games within the context of their environments, why for example the date of a game’s publishing matters when discussing its quality. If games were just machines or toys, you could disqualify time from the equation. A train that makes sounds a releases smoke will always be better than one made of wood. A game is not a toy, it’s not a corkscrew, its creation and existence are tied to the society and culture that initially received it, you have to recognize and acknowledge that when discussing them, otherwise your not discussing them, you’re just discussing the technical side of a socio-technical system.

Like any other tech, a standout product sets a standard for all others to copy, there are innovators, there are knockoffs. Tech influences other tech. Why do all shooters control the same these days? One of the greatest ways to make a banging game is to look at others that were well received.

I mean on a more interesting level, people who make games as adults are often people who played games as kids. Same thing with film or literature or music or whatever. Designers are inspired by the games they’ve played in childhood, these ideas are carried with them.

The problem is that Perfect Dark wasn’t a part of many people’s childhoods, nobody really paid any attention to it. It wasn’t accessible enough, it was expensive, it was poorly timed. Perfect Dark’s quality in literally all aspects of its being were more than worthy of being an inspiration to games developed in the next generation. Instead, everyone remembered GoldenEye, took influence from it, placed it down as a baseline and tried to move forward from there, even though that’s literally what Perfect Dark had already done, and better, and by the same people. 

A lot of first-person-shooters tried to be their generations’ GoldenEye, everyone wanted to be the maker of the next GoldenEye. Arguably, though sacrificing local for networked multiplayer, COD won. Meanwhile, Perfect Dark sitting alone being played in a house full of greeks, Perfect Dark was the one that really got it.


You can look at COD as taking what worked best about GoldenEye and focusing on that. People only ever talk about the multiplayer, not the singleplayer. So scrap the objectives. People want to play with their friends more, so multiplayer is now online. Kids will come home every night from school, connect to a lobby and play, just like we used to on the weekends in 007. In many ways Call of Duty and other modern first-person-shooters like it meet the base requirements of a GoldenEye like experience, but come nowhere close to a Perfect Dark like one.

http://ca.complex.com/pop-culture/2015/11/goldeneye-007-legacy


Not only was Perfect Dark an actual literal improvement over goldeneye, it did things that were ahead of its time. Playing this game again as an adult, you’ll have to keep reminding yourself of how old it is.

Okay, so the main menu of the game takes place in the player’s secret base populated by a couple of other characters and literally the most functional doors in gaming. I remember just kind of thinking it was a goofy way to access the training challenges and was probably just an excuse not to have the game boot up to a main menu screen. I was completely wrong though, it’s totally intentional, it prepares you for a mission that actually takes place in this building towards the end of the game. I’m not going to show for spoiler reasons, but the ideas is that if you’ve explored the place before, it gives you a serious advantage in that mission which is otherwise really a pain to figure out.

The only other game I can think of that has done anything remotely similar is MGSV, which came out 15 years later and did it poorly.

I know a bit about what my audience’s demographics are, and I know that this game is older than a lot of you. This is the sort of top notch software people were working full time jobs producing while you didn’t even exist yet, and nobody’s done it since as of y’all showing up. Yeah, so I blame you guys. All of you. You all suck.

Oh yeah cool partner stuff like RE5. Oh wait, this happened 9 years earlier.

Oh cool a combat simulation mode, like the Combat Training in Call of Duty BlackOps 1 and 2, except much much more meaningfully complex what with custom AIs and more interesting weapons that all balance eachother out. Oh and also the AIs could play various different games modes, whereas in COD they can only play basic deathmatch modes. Hmmmmmmmm.

How much had AI advanced in 10 years? Seems like more than enough to not have to scope down from a game that literally ran on 2 THOUSANTHS, 2 FREAKING THOUSANTHS of the memory your game needs to operate. This game runs on 4 Megs. This game runs on 2 Gigs. This game is able to process over 300 times more things than this games does, per second. This game has more functional AI than this one.

You know people poop on the new starwars battlefront, but I was impressed that they actually made bots that could play non-deathmatch modes. They’re still just bots though, not simulants. They’re nowhere near worthy of deserving a Blade Runner reference.


But speaking of Blade Runner, that’s what I’m trying to say. Unlike the game, Blade Runner became a cult classic fairly quickly after its initially rocky start, and look at the impact it's had on sci-fi in all forms of media. Blade Runner was a different type of sci-fi, tons of other films, tons of games, ton of ideas owe it credit. It took visions of the future into a whole new direction, well respected as one of the most overall impactful pieces of media of the sci-fi genre, which it absolutely deserved.

Similarly, Perfect Dark’s creative direction had the capacity to have such an impact on the genre of first-person-shooters, but it didn’t for no fault of its own. I wholeheartedly believe that if Perfect Dark had been released under different circumstances, gaming today would be completely different. I’m saying imagine the genre of sci-fi in an alternate reality where Blade Runner never existed. That’s what I think we’re in with games and shooters, some crappy alternate version of a world where Perfect Dark should have been GoldenEye.


Perfect Dark is worth your attention whether you’re just a player or a hopeful, it has been for 17 years and will continue to be until another FPS draws serious inspiration from it (and isn’t timesplitters) and finds ways to expand upon the sort of stuff it did. Shooter bot AI development been almost stagnant since developers found ways to connect players together, reducing their efforts in challenge design. Things like this need to be improved though because they can offer challenges human players alone can’t, the popularity of wave based survival games is evidence of interest, proof that “friends like teaming up against bots”. Look at the leap between James Bond’s single player only bots and Perfect Dark’s multipurpose and portable simulants. This was 3 years of technological progress within the specialization of game design. This was 3 years 17 years ago. Nobody has topped the base interestingness and functionality of preset bot personalities, except maybe Medabots, but they haven’t because they haven’t started from here. Hey, hey, take all these machine learning techniques, don’t chuck them, but START from this. Start from these basic profiles. Don’t start from scratch, don’t reinvent the wheel. It’s already been done, just open your eyes.

In closing, Perfect Dark is a really good game. Go tell your mom.



Alright, Pikmin 2, let’s go.

Hold up, put your left foot in, take your left foot out.

So there I was, 3 years ago, big boy making plans to do 2 series of 3 videos each at the same time, one about Resident Evil, one about Pikmin. Resident Evil, after many years and many distractions, finally got done with it. Pikmin? Dropped off after the first.

Except here’s the deal, in the time between the start of that series and today, they literally built and marketed and published a new Resident Evil game… and my sister got it for me… crap. But more importantly the general public would agree, my presentation style and aesthetic have changed, drastically, monstrously. So in my current state, wanting to finally explain to you bozos why Pikmin 2 is one of my favorite games ever, I’m caught in a pickle, tickle tickle.

Not only am I making a sequel to a 3 year old video in an entirely different format and age, but the video in particular that I want to follow up is probably THE worst thing not-unlisted from this channel. It’s bad, it’s full of shit, it’s not serious, it’s malfunctions at a heroic level.

So, where we go from here boss? How I gonna go? What I’m gonna do? Who I’m gonna what?

All very good questions, shut up. Today, we start fresh, clean the slate, we summarize, we remake, re-imagine, remaster, folks, today, I present to you, my video about Pikmin 1 Reimagineered.


Ladies and gentlemen, before getting into Pikmin 2, let me tell you 4 things I think you need to know about Pikmin 1.



1) 
First, Pikmin 1 was a game second to being a tech demo. The tech behind it was originally made for a presentation in 2000 and later goofed around with until they managed to make a game out of it. See, the thing is, games are socio-technical systems. Back in the years surrounding the new millenium, hardware updates across console generations had much more of an impact on the sorts of things you could run on them. A best-case N64 with the expansion pack was greatly outclassed in terms of system memory by the out-of-the-box gamecube’s 43 megs give or take a few on chips.

This thing upped the memory by well over 540%. Count in much faster CPUs and GPUs, and you’ve got yourself the sort of thing that, if you’d never worked with before, you couldn’t just “start” making games on it, you needed to build and run all sorts of experiments.

But of course, you also didn’t want to have all of that experimentation time wasted. That’s why this little mario showpiece reportedly has itself ripped apart and incorporated into just about every first-part game on the GameCube.


Pikmin started as a big experiment people made to see how far they could push the hardware, it started as a graphics project, not a game. People working on it had no idea what direction they were going with it for a very long time, to say it had a typical development for a game would be wrong, to say it had a mostly atypical one would be correct.

More memory meant you could store information about more things, more characters, more animations, higher quality textures, etc. Faster processors meant you could actually process and display those many more things on screen at a certain framerate. It also meant you could do more things ‘at once’, which I put emphasis on for a specific reason.

Something I said but didn’t elaborate enough on in the original video was about threads. I said since there can be a maximum of 100 pikmin on screen at once that the game used at least 100 threads for them, definitely more, but it’s just a fun number to throw out. Now, in games, no matter how much it might look like things are happening “at the same time”, they never really are, unless they’re running on a parallel computer, but no consoles are able to run in parallel, right?

But no, so threading is actually a sequential activity, multiple process threads come to the processor and it works on each of them for a bit at a time. Now, evidently, the you give a slow processor too many threads and depending on how the game is optimized, you’ll see things start to slow down. But at the same time, given a faster processor, you can give it more threads to be able to give the impression that all of these things are really happening all at once 30 times per second.

These were the key new features of the gamecube that its launch titles needed to sell to consumers, and that’s why Pikmin is the way it is. Pikmin ticks all of the boxes they had:
It’s a gorgeous game that takes advantage of greater memory to load larger textures and more detailed models and animations, and equally as important it had a lot of things-happening in its world that the computer could prove to its user that it could handle. Pikmin was meant to be the sort of game that showed people what sorts of limits the gamecube could reach, and it pulled it off, though, some would say at the expense of not really always feeling like a finished game, or, like, a fully realized game. 


2)
Second, while Pikmin was unique and interesting and quirky and cool, it lacked some serious polish. Playing on the Wii version allowed me to avoid what are probably some of the jankiest game controls known to man. The game also didn’t really have a distinct genre, it wasn’t really an rts and it wasn’t really an action adventure game either, but for some reason it presented itself as an arcade-like experience. This was remedied on the Wii by allowing players to revisit previous days to improve their score, but in the original game you only had one shot to beat it. The main game was all about collecting as many ship parts as possible within a 30 day time limit and amassing a great score at the end. Yes, this sort of idea works on a smaller scale at arcades, but there’s a reason you’ll never find real-time-strategy or action-adventure games at an arcade: because these are experiences that take more time and thought and persist player progress.

Besides, this was a console game, it was a single-player mode of a console game that people play on a couch with a controller in their lap. Why is there even a high-score at the end? Who’s it meant for, just myself?

Again, it's pretty clear that a lot of these decisions were made in a time where direction wasn’t clear, if I had to guess I’d say they decided to make it timed because they realized that without time against you, there was no way to lose. Look, it’s still okay to like the game, I love it, it’s fun to do a quick playthrough of every few years, it’s the sort of game you can run through in a weekend, but its structure is just not very good, it’s not fun to replay multiple times in a row to perfect a strat and get a faster time, it’s too long and it’s hybrid rts/action gameplay isn’t compatible with that sort of experience anyways.


3)
Third, Forgetting the time limit though, one of the coolest results of the mixture of strategy and action manifested itself in the way that Pikmin were basically your health. Now, unlike rts games, Pikmin didn’t give you control of an all seeing camera, they gave you control of a dude, but unlike an action game, that dude’s health didn’t actually matter, at all, it had no impact on how you played the game, in fact for a long time I forgot it even existed and just assumed you had infinite health.

The real health in the game was these dudes, and interestingly enough they were also your weapon. Your pikmin count was reflective of how you’d play the game: if you had many you’d be able to afford to rush enemies and take a few losses, if you had less, you’d need to be cautious and either go back to collect or grow more pikmin, or just be really really careful.

So what the game did really well was force you at points to divide your health up. Growing more pikmin was done by sending some back to base with food and dead enemies, except doing that meant those pikmin sent would stay at the base, so increasing your global pikmin count reduced your local count, essentially weakening you. Same for certain puzzles which involved leaving groups of pikmin in places to either slowly knock away at walls or construct bridges. You could set all of your remaining pikmin to it and get it done as quickly as possible, or you could divide your group and leave only some of them there, taking the rest with you to multitask, basically temporarily reducing your health until later picking them back up.

The game saw you constantly walking into situations with massive groups of pikmin and leaving later with only a few, either from sustained losses or from voluntary multitasking, and that was super cool, that’s one of the reasons pikmin is so unique. There’s the strategy and the action, but there’s the adventure elements too, the puzzles who’s solutions leave you with less and less active pikmin by your side. Pikmin is many things, but most of all it’s unique.


4)
And finally, fourth, the last thing I think you should know Pikmin is just how thick its atmosphere was. It’s crazy to feel this obligation to say that this dumbass looking fucking dude is probably one of the most well-written characters in gaming. While the game’s main playable characters and little helpers might seem like it’s going for something a bit jovial, Olimar’s journal entries and the flavor text all over the game set this kind of ridiculous dark tone. Olimar is scared, he’s depressed, he’s worried that he’ll die on an alien planet and never see his kids again, he gets distressed when he watches his pikmin die, he feels guilt for failing them, but he’s also super curious about this mysterious world he finds himself in. The music sometimes can pass as cheerful, but other times it’s just moody and foreboding.

Again, gotta point out that NONE OF THIS jives with the game’s main time-trial challenge, but it’s as good as it gets. Olimar’s journal entries are introspective, and as many of them are triggered by player actions during the days, the player is always in this immersive sort of state of self-reflection. It’s a good loop, every day you do something, make some progress, find a new thing to do for the next day, reflect briefly on the day just passed, and then continue. MMMmmm Pikmin is a [kiss fingers].



So Pikmin 2? OOuuuf gonna stop ya right there. I’m now gonna start working on that, I have an idea as to how I’d like to tackle it. Pikmin addresses basically all of Pikmin 1’s issues, but there’s one dungeon, uh, yes, Pikmin 2 has dungeons, but there’s one dungeon that I think shows Pikmin at it’s peak performance, at the best it can possibly be as a game, it takes the most advantage of the game’s structure and design to make something super super cool, definitely not enjoyable, holy crap, but certainly an amazing time.

Anyways, with all that said, thanks for coming to this recap by friends, and, uh, see you all around.


Research:
https://www.pikminwiki.com/Cave
https://www.pikminwiki.com/Music_in_Pikmin_2#Caves

“and their floors are generated randomly each time, but follow a specific layout scheme. According to earlier versions of the game, this is because the space-time continuum was warped due to the cave's geomagnetic radiation field.[1] The final version's instruction manual simplifies this and simply calls it "a powerful magnetic field".[2][3]”

Patrick Holleman - Composite Games
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ct8a3D7FvB0
Pikmin 2 is a composite game?



Unclear if fully random. Music is supposedly confirmed to be, but levels no. We know that caves are made up of cave units, but not how they get built when the game actually runs. There’s some semblance of similarity between new intances. It might be that it switches between a few preset possible layouts for each floor, but either way, it gets the job done. Whether its a system or designer that does it, making a level change on between playthroughs will always have the same effect, it’ll fuck you up.

https://www.pikminwiki.com/Cave_unit

Now, I can’t prove it, but its my educated guess, which, since I have a degree I guess describes all of my guesses… which originally I was just gonna write in as a joke and say HA and cut to black with just the word on screen, but now I’m realizing that by definition its true and that I need a different term to use to express, like, particular significance of a guess that I make. Um, okay, so it’s my ______ guess that the dungeon’s randomization takes some parameters which are a measure of player skill/performance, possibly things like pikmin count vs expected (like a golf par score) or time to clear each preceding level. I say this because at the few times I was doing really really good, the game would just throw really weird ambushes at me, often right at the entrance to a new level. Tough 1 hit kill enemies spawning right in front of me, placing sleeping and otherwise optional foes along a critical path between a treasure and the ship pod. Etc.




So Pikmin 2? Here we go. Game shows up, aaaay whaddup? So first things first, since the prequel’s primary goal was not to be a game but rather to be a sort of tech demo, a proof of concept with just enough glue to stick a price tag to, this game doesn’t have to do that. The gamecubes have been moved, you don’t have to be a salesman anymore. Pikmin 2 sits down and says “okay, I have all of these technically complex mechanics and this interesting and unique design that doesn’t really fit any genre and this unnecessarily deep world and thicc aesthetic, how do I, like, make an actual game out of this? Where do I go from here? Do I abandon the arcade scores? Commit to either strategy or action?”

And you know what this motherfucker does? Yeah, it drops a few things sure, but it adds to the jambalaya that is its composition the building blocks of a rogue-like. Pikmin 2, among many many other things, is a freaking dungeon crawler, just because, yeah, why the hell not?

So first, what was dropped?
Well, first, I now have the vocabulary to properly explain the gameplay of pikmin 1, so lets start there. Lemme just shine my flashlight an a boi for a second. Patrick Holleman is the founder of TheGameDesignForum.com and author of multiple books about game design. He’s been at this stuff for over 7 years, madman. Very recently he’s launched a project to make his writing more accessible by adapting it to video presentations in a series he’s calling The Game Design Extracts, and in the first episode (which you should ABSOLUTELY check out), he explains 3 eras of video game design. The second era, following the arcade one, is called the composite era and is defined by games that mixed multiple genres and directed(pronounce like DIRECTOR) the player’s actions towards one and then the other intermittently through design, but more significantly, allowed for the player to use their skills in one genre to solve problems of another, as he puts it.

So, what is pikmin 1, finally? It’s a composite game composed of both action/adventure and Real-Time-Strategy gameplay, which okay, is a whole other can of worms because both are technically composite structures themselves, but as we should know since its one of my favorites, the composite design pattern allows for composites to be made of components of either concrete leaves or other composites, so we’re good. So in pikmin you had moments of intense action but also points where you had to sit yourself down and solve a quick puzzle, and you also had moments had to apply strategy or rely on more than quick thinking and reflexes to take out enemies, buuuuuuuuut, you could use brute force in-place of careful planning is some situations at the risk of more pikmin losses, and you could also use advanced strategies or even puzzle solving tools to handle basic combat encounters more efficiently.

Buuuuuuut, Pikmin also had this weird arcade type scoring system that didn’t jive well with either the action/adventure or RTS genres, and absolutely didn’t jig with the whole composite thing, it existed as something outside of the gameplay, something tacked on at the end of the game with little reason and the mildest context.

So Pikmin 2, realizing its time to BE A REAL GAME	, first things first, drops the arcade crap… except nooooooot really.

See, unlike the first game where the goal is to collect the items as quickly as possible under a maximum 30 day time-limit to get the best score, pikmin 2 is about collecting them at your own pace with no rush. Though, they did manage to include an arcade-like scoring intelligently, once again, contextualized by story but more importantly, totally dismissable if you don’t care.

In Pikmin 2, the idea is that your company is 10,000 hotpocket dollars in dept so you go to this alien planet to collect treasures which each have a monetary value and reduce your debt by that amount. Now, all of the treasures in the game combined come out to waaaaay more than that 10k required, so what that means is that the 10k is your checkpoint, your arcade goal, and once you reach it the game presents you a high-score for it before allowing you to continue playing and collect the rest of the treasures with 0 changes to gameplay. Again, once getting them all, presenting you with another score for that new checkpoint.

This change obviously goes hand-in-hand with the removal of the hard time-limit. In the last game the 30 days were enough to apply juuuust enough pressure to light a fire under your ass, but if you’re going for a speedrun, to complete a 100% debt recovery goal as quickly as possible, you’re butt’s already on fire, you don’t need the game to push you, and forcing that sort of thing puts-off players that just want to explore this beautiful world, time taken. So, adios to the clock, the game really has no need for it, it doesn’t motivate anyone that wouldn't already be motivated without it.


But, as you should remember, there was one justifiable reason for a time limit in the first game. It made for a failure state. Without the chance of running out of time, a player of Pikmin 1 would have no choice but to win, there’s no way to lose, no way to fail, no pressure or tension at all. Playing pikmin would be like twiddling your thumbs, it’d just be something you do, not a game.

So Pikmin 2 removing the time limit… doesn’t that mean you can’t lose? How could a combo game of action/adventure and strategy work without a failure state? You couldn’t, so they must’ve come up with something, right? How do you lose in Pikmin 2? Well, believe it or not, you actually can’t, there is no failure state in Pikmin 2, nothing akin to not getting all of the ship pieces and letting Olimar die, not even a sub-optimal form of success like completing the game without all of the optional ship parts in the last game. If you throw enough time at it, you will eventually complete this game, there’s nothing you can do about it.

Except, remember how in Pikmin 1 we said that Pikmin were, in essence, your health? And that growing more and collecting more was akin to taking a health pack or respawning? That was cool, perfect example right there of the sorts of things you get when your game combines action and strategy, a resource becomes your health, your offense, your defense. That’s cool. What if though, what if you added another genre to the already unique mix, a genre characterized by a permanence in loss, by the disability to predict and plan with certainty, a genre with rules so at odds with the already established gameplay loop that if you wanted to implement it, you’d need to do so in segments fully separated from the rest of the game. What if, you turned off the pikmin in pikmin? (shot of composite structure of pikmin with ‘roguelike’ being attached).

And I hate to tease you again over this, but we’ll get to it in a bit because there’s a subject to discuss that I don’t know how to segue into and honestly is one of the first things anyone should bring up when discussing Pikmin 2. See, everything I’ve said so far about how they removed the scoring system and the time limit and the player still feeling motivated is mostly true, I just can’t help but have this little ounce of doubt in my mind that I would have been as motivated if I were, say, collecting random ship parts in this game again.

You see, the treasures in pikmin 2 are really special, they’re not random necessary bits and they’re not useful collectibles with any function in the game, but what’s interesting is that they’re all real things, and most of them are placed products. See, it’s not really clear exactly how this happened, but by one way or another Pikmin 2 ended up being host to probably more instances of product placement than any, anything, ever, that has ever existed. There are countless brands represented here, the advertisement was even localized to present players with icons and items most likely to be familiar to them. In japan, nobody’s gonna see a skippy peanut butter lid or an assortment of duracell batteries.

Now, in any other game, this sort of crap would be a big slap in the face, but the thing is Pikmin takes place on a post-apocalyptic earth, so while finding random but common human tools and items is fun and immersive, recognizing a branded item, something you see every day, like, your favorite yogurt for instance, that will always evoke a stronger response. These items being domestic rather than alien makes you personally value them. In Pikmin 1 you were motivated because of a time limit. In Pikmin 2, you’re motivated because the treasures you’re after, although optional, are interesting, they’re a fun surprise, and you don’t know what they are until you find them. And then when you do find them and bring them back, you get all this fun flavor text where Olimar tries to make sense of the item and the ai in your ship tries to generate sales pitches for them.

Psychology: Intrinsic Reward
(http://www.spring.org.uk/2009/10/how-rewards-can-backfire-and-reduce-motivation.php)

See, there are two types of motivation, intrinsic, reasonings for things we do that have to do with those things and those things alone, aka, “I make videos because I like to, it's fun and fulfills some desire I have to teach and entertain people” aka “it’s the journey not the destination” and there is extrinsic motivation, reasons for things we do that have to do with the outcome of doing those things, aka “I make videos because I make $20 and ad revenue peanuts out of them”, aka “the ends justify the means”. In my case, it should be clear which is my true motivation. At this point in the script/research phase I’d been at it for about 7 hours, add in the vo time right now and the editing I’m gonna be doing between this moment and the you’re in now as a view, that’s a lot of hours of personal time spent. If I were the sort of person who was motivated extrinsically, I’d be spending my weekends doing free-lance web dev and making a killing. But ay, that’s not me, and it turns out it’s actually not most people.

In similar studies of the Overjustification hypothesis on subjects from different age groups, it’s been shown that when it came to tasks that they were already intrinsically motivated to do out of personal interest, for example kids drawing or adults quitting smoking, it was shown that conditioning people to collect rewards for these activities actually decreased their results. Kids who were told they would receive a dollar for each drawing they produced stopped drawing as much and found drawing to be less fun than kids who either didn’t receive a reward or weren’t told they would receive one. When you know exactly what it is you’re going to get out of an activity you already have fun doing, you’ll do it less.

Let's find an example in gaming. I liked Breath of the Wild, a lot. One of my favorite things about it was how it took a step back from the old-school long and drawn out dungeons with multiple serial puzzle rooms by disconnecting all of them and spreading each room around the overworld to be challenged at the player’s leisure. I loved that, I mean, like I said, I don’t think it makes sense to put a bunch of functionally disconnected puzzle rooms in a single building together, they shouldn’t be in the same infrastructure unless they connect or interact in some meaningful ways, which is why I also like that the only dungeons in the game are exactly that, large spaces with no clear room division where the puzzles involve moving the whole structure, but anyways, that’s a topic for another video.

So raise your hand if this applied to you. At the beginning of the game, I was weak and needed spirit orbs to strengthen myself and I also found most of the shrines to be a lot of fun. But eventually, that wore off. Eventually, just like the kids being paid to draw or the smokers being rewarded to quit, the shrines which I was intrinsically motivated to do started feeling like WORK because I knew exactly what sorts of rewards lie in each one. Tied to the fact that the rewards started being less and less valuable to me as I grew stronger, I got to a point where, after finding a new shrine, I’d unlock it to turn it into a fast-travel point, but I wouldn’t enter right away. This is something I’m pretty sure we’ve all done. It’s the same reason myself and others found Mario Odyssey to be super uninteresting.

Things that would probably normally be just fine ended up feeling boring, we felt less motivated all because the reward for a million different fun things was always exactly the same boring thing.


Rewards in games
So what does this have to do with Pikmin? Well, the thing is a lot of games, especially collectathons which, ugh, Jesus Christ is Pikmin a collectathon too? Or can that just fall under the adventure side of action/adventure? Yeah you know what? It can. So these sorts of games often need to extrinsically motivate you, often by giving you some reason to collect so many things. If I had Sonic footage to throw onscreen I’d probably say in sonic you’re motivated to collect rings because the outcome of 100 is a new life and the outcome of any is a free hit without death. You don’t collect rings because its fun. If I had footage of any relevant 3d platformer I’d probably say that in those games you often collect things because reaching a certain amount will unlock a new area. In Metal Gear Solid 5 WHICH I DO HAVE FOOTAGE OF, you collect soldiers because it gets them out of your way and strengthens your base, not because its fun, in fact it’s not fun at all, once you teach your dog to do it your dog does it, otherwise y’aint nothing but a hound dog.


In this game though, because each treasure is unique and genuinely interesting, the player becomes intrinsically motivated to do it. In Pikmin 2 you collect treasure for the sake of collecting treasure, because the items find and the flavor text you unlock for bringing them back are rewards in and of themselves. The task is fun and so you want to do it for the sake of itself. Like, I don’t care that Novacanoo costs 80 pictobucks, I care that it’s Novacanoo, that it’s a kiwi, I care about what olimar and the ship have to say about the kiwi, I don’t care what it does, I don’t care what impact it has on the dept I’m supposed to be recovering, the value the treasure has to me, the player of the game, is the treasure itself.

Even the special treasures that you can extract powerups from, it doesn’t matter, it doesn’t change anything, it’s a surprise reward that doesn’t over-justify the treasure itself.

Now, one of the reasons that the Overjustification theorem seems to hold true, the reason that people get less motivated to do things they already like when they get rewarded for it is because of cognitive dissonance. See, your brain is a giant a neural network, it’s literally, a graph. Okay, I know this sounds like a joke, but I’m not joking. All your brain is is a set of nodes and weighted edges that trains itself based on inputs and outputs and feedback. Except, there’s the network doesn’t just train forwards, there’s also back-propagation which goes from a set of output and feedback to rebalance the network backwards and determine what the perceived input should have been. This is what cognitive dissonance is, your brain will construct for itself beliefs to justify outcomes or actions you’re doing, to get consistency and relieve stress.

This, is cool information for you to have, but other than being a segue into another type of dissonance, it serves no greater purpose in this video.

Ludonarrative dissonance is when what ya doing in da game ain't want da game thinks ya doing, and it's also something that doesn’t exists in Pikmin 2. In Pikmin 2, Olimar and You, and, Louie.. uh, did I forget to mention that the game gives you a whole second playable character that can lead his own group of pikmin and be switched to at any time which opens up the possibilities you have within the 15 minute timespan of an in-game day by allowing you to multi-task via two instances of agency in the game at the same time in real time? Crap. Um, well, in Pikmin 2 you have a whole second playable character that can lead his own group of pikmin and be switched to at any time which opens up the possibilities you have within the 15 minute timespan of an in-game day by allowing you to multi-task via two instances of agency in the game at the same time in real time, which is really cool, also if you use it well it can make combat cool, also it’s used as the solution to a puzzle during one boss fight. Um, but anyways, the story of Pikmin 2 is that you’re collecting treasure, and the story of the PLAY of Pikmin 2, the story if what you’re actually doing in the game, is also that you’re collecting treasure.

Pikmin 2 is one of few games with a story that resonates with the player’s mindset in-game. Now yes, I’m aware, if we were talking sound the correct word would be harmony, but because “to resonate” can be interchanged with “to inspire” and because the definition in this context doesn’t interfere with anything else and reads “to have particular meaning or importance for someone : to affect or appeal to someone in a personal or emotional way”, and because that’s basically exactly the ledge which intrinsic motivation can use to step into your mind, I’m gonna be an asshole right here guys and say Pikmin 2 is ludonarratively ressonant. Shoot me. And this is also why I think it’s one of the most immersive game out there.

Forget all the incredible environment storytelling this game puts on display, forget all of the unnecessarily well written text content, the day-night cycle, the world, the enemies. The fact alone that there is no conflict with what’s happening in the game and what you’re doing in the game, the fact that finding a piece of a pickle jar in the game is no different than digging one up in real life, this is the reason that I don’t play pikmin often, but whenever I do, I can’t put it down. It’s just swallows you whole, it immerses you completely in its charm, it’s the sort of world that you could live in, it’s real.

Look, I like keeping things straight and strict around here, I don’t do this mushy wooshy, but there is no game I’ve ever had this sort of connection with and also be able to explain exactly why. There’s no curtain to pull back, there’s nothing, but it always gets me. Being surprised by treasure after treasure never gets old. Pikmin 2 is like this poison that just gets to you, in the best way.

But the thing is, for this all to work so well there has to be a hell of a lot of treasure, and with only 4 explorable areas in the game, 3 of which by the way were recycled and modified areas from the last game, we have another question to add to our growing list.

How is pikmin 2 a roguelike?
How do you lose?
and Where’s all the treasure placed as not to crowd up?

The answer to all of these, finally, the biggest and most important gameplay change in the sequel is the Caves.

Roguelike Genre (dungeons)

Around each of the few maps in the game, yes there are treasures lying about which require action and puzzle and strategy to get to and recover, but similarly distributed there are entrances to caves which are basically dungeons and are what I’m gonna call them for the rest of this video.

Each of these caves, aside from some tutorial ones, is a gauntlet of intense and focused challenges, testing the player’s skills in the game’s already explored composite genres. However, dungeon play modifies a few of the game’s rules:


Number 1, the time limit stops. While above ground a day’s 15 minutes are all you have to get as much done as possible, here that’s not the case. Many of these dungeons take upwards of an hour or two to complete on your first go, assuming you actually come out alive, which we’ll get to, but time is frozen inside the dungeon. Once you exit, you return to the overworld that brought you there at the exact time of day that you entered, which is important because if you enter a dungeon early in a day, this extra time is afforded to you to recover the losses you sustained inside of it. Because rule change Number 2, inside a dungeon, the pikmin you enter with are all you have.

Once you go in, you lose access to the onions that reside outside by your ship. These onions are responsible for 3 of the game’s most important mechanics:
Withdrawing, reproducing, and depositing pikmin.

Without access to the onions, what you came in with is all you have, you can’t just pull out more poker buddies whenever you want, and you also can’t convert downed enemies into new seeds. This immediately plays with your motivations, in the main game, sustaining a few losses during a fight is okay because as long as you win you’ll be able to bring back enough make more dudes than what you lost. Now though, killing enemies is less rewarding, so it's in your best interests to avoid them whenever possible. Depending on how they’re placed in a dungeon, some may be necessary to take out to clear a path or might need to be defeated to drop a treasure, but other times its possible to identify enemies or entire wings of caves that can be ignored.

The other consequence of the onions being gone is that you can’t safely store your pikmin away in them, meaning you have to carefully use both playable captains and the layouts of the dungeons to store your pikmin away is physically safe spaces. And with as many dungeons as this game has, you KNOW there’s at least one that plays with each of these disabilities specific to the lack of onions, especially that last one, which is really really interesting, but we’ll get there.


So the game throws you into these secret environments with tons of challenges and levels and treasures and expects you to overcome them which a permanency to loss is in effect. This is how you lose in pikmin 2, you can’t lose the whole game, but while in dungeons there’s this concept of micro-loss that you can experience.

Losing a pikmin in a dungeon is a loss, it permanently reduces your health, attack power, and even effectiveness as collecting treasures, because remember, each item may take a different number of pikmin to carry it, or sometimes specific types of pikmin, most often water ones, to carry it. So loosing too many pikmin is another loss, each cave has a point of no return where if you’ve lost that many pikmin, you won’t be able to 100% it this time and will need to revisit it later. For instance, the treasures dropped by the final boss of the game take 30 pikmin each to cary, greater than the twenty fucking nine I finished with, I hate this game.

Also though, losing flowers is a type of loss. See, pikmin have 3 forms, leaf, bud and flower. Flower guys are quicker, faster, and stronger too, and they’re what you’re gonna use to overwhelm some dudes. Except there are some enemy types in the game which don’t have any interest in eating your pikmin but instead want to revert their flowers back to leaves. Allowing your whole squad to go down to the basic form is almost equivalent to losing a 3rd of your health or power. Having them weaker means other hungry enemies will be able to chase them with greater ease. Also, some of these enemies will have an animation where they shake your pikmin off, which is another way they can lose flowers. So losing flowers is a type of loss that you try to avoid as well, a type of loss that doesn’t matter above ground because with unlimited days you can just plant a ton of seeds and farm new flower pikmin for a while.

Here, the only way to recover flowers are when the game occasionally throws you a rope, gives you an egg or something which may drop sweet nectar, but other times it drops spiders or bomb rocks on you which can wipe out massive portions of your guys if you’re not paying attention.

The dungeons do this all the time, you’ll be multiple levels and minutes in before the game throws at you a bunch of different instant kills. For instance, frogs. These guys, unlike some other enemies, don’t have a chewing phase to their attack allowing you to recover pikmin, they have a large one hit squad that, if you make one mistake, will destroy your chances at completing the dungeon. Seeing one of these dudes 5 or 6 levels deep is a major psyche out.

So you might be asking, how is this fair? How can the game get away with tricking and bullying you like this? How can it allows itself to expect players to learn to things, to be introduced to new enemy types and mechanics in an already tense environment?

Well, the thing is, Dungeons don’t have to be fair. Look, on their own, none of the dungeon puzzles are particularly difficult, but stringing so many together with no way out or to reset, by giving damage and loss an immutability that isn’t present above ground, they increase the probability that you’ll make a mistake while not thinking straight, by overwhelming you with challenge and multiple tasks, like forgetting to monitor your pikmin demolishing a wall and allowing them to become ambushed and killed.

In a dungeon, the difficulty is a function of how many pikmin you have left which decreases with time, and it looks like this. Above ground your difficulty looks more like a straight line because you have the safety net of the onions. The reason this works, the reason the dungeons are allowed to be so inhumane and long and cruel is that, if you totally fail, you reach that point of no return, if you don’t have enough pikmin to collect treasure or beat a boss, it’s not as offensive because when you leave, you go back to this, you can spend as much time as you want hunting wildlife to strengthen your army and tackle a dungeon that bit you again and again, there’s no 30 day limit, there’s nothing limiting you at all. You can’t lose above ground, that’s the cushion you fall back on when you fail one of almost infinitely many ways inside a dungeon…

Or you know… you could just be an idiot like me and accidentally take on of the chicken exits when you meant to go deeper. Whoops.

This is the reason the pikmin 2 can throw you a special dungeon with rematches against every boss in the freaking game and you can’t complain, you have as many attempts as you like, and if you get to the end in state unfit for the final challenge, it’s not such a big deal.


And what’s really really cool is that every follow-up visit to a dungeon will be different than the last, which I didn’t actually know until failing a few, because the dungeons are actually randomly generated. Each level always has the same enemies and treasures, but their placement and the building blocks making up the level’s layout and even the freaking music is procedurally generated. So just cause you did it before doesn’t mean you can make a b-line for the exit because now the location of the exit has changed. Maybe it’ll be to your benefit, or maybe you’re gonna be surrounded by enemies as soon as you spawn in.


Pikmin 2 has embedded in it a randomly generated dungeon crawler where you go around committing merciless war crimes and ammassing bodies of fallen enemies all for a giant can of apple juice, and your consequence for failure is being sent back to another game, basically just pikmin 1 but without a day limit. It’s a really good setup that motivates you to complete it for yourself, but also doesn’t take away your ability to just spend a few days growing your strength.



Its for these reasons that the dungeons are 100% fair, pikmin 2 is practically bulletproof game with no flaws and I love it.

Except now, that’s not true. Pikmin 2 does a lot, and almost everything it does is perfect, with the exception of a single thing, a single thing that in many cases ruins an otherwise nearly perfect experience.




Purple and White Pikmin

Did I forget to mention that Pikmin 2 adds two new pikmin types? Oh, yeah, well, pikmin 2 adds two new pikmin types, white and purple.

Purple pikmin, yeah they’re cool no worries, white pikmin are where the problem is.

See, the onions, like we went over, are how you reproduce pikmin, however, they’re colored red blue and yellow. White and purple dudes don’t use them and instead can only be acquired via special color converting flowers. The way it works is you throw one pikmin in and the flower spits out a seed of the new type. The rules are each flower can only be used for 5 pikmin before disappearing, and the flowers only appear within dungeons, nowhere in the overworld.

So that means the only way to get purple and white pikmin is to enter dungeons and convert existing pikmin to those types, and in the case of purple dudes, it’s easy enough. See, their special ability is that they’re 10 times as strong as regular dudes so they can lift heavier things, and whenever there’s a case in a dungeon where purple guys are needed, the dungeons gives you those purple flowers in advance, otherwise, since reproducing purple pikmin is restrictive, it’d be unfair.

For whatever reason, this is not the case with white pikmin.

White dudes have a lot more responsibilities… first, they’re the only ones resistant to poison, meaning of there’s a poisonous wall or enemy to be taken care of, these are the guys. They’re also poisonous themselves, so the best way to use them in combat is as sacrifices. Allowing an enemy to consume one deals massive damage. And finally, some treasures in the world are buried underground and need to be dug up. All pikmin can assist in digging, but the only one that are capable of detecting a buried object beneath them and commencing a dig are the white ones. So they’re like gatekeepers to buried treasures.

That’s a lot of use for these dudes, and it’d be acceptable if it weren’t for the fact that white pikmin are not as prevalent in the world as their uses.

First, the element of poison. When other pikmin touch it they run away in terror, and if you don’t whistle to them they die. Unlike spouts of fire or electrical trip wires and enemies which have short times of vulnerability where they can be handled with pikmin out of their element, tubes ejecting poisonous fumes or enemies with that purple musk can’t be touched by anyone else aside from the poison pikmin. The issue is that these poison spouts are waaaaay more common than your poison guys.

See, I played the game for a while and took as many opportunities to grow my poison population as I could, but I never really wound up with many more than 25 or so of these guys, the game never really gave them to you when you needed them. So when a dungeon indicated it would contain poisonous traps, afraid any I took in might end up being lost and knowing that as soon as I entered, loss became permanent, I’d typically take 5 to 7 white guys in max.

Remember when I talked about micro-losses before? Well, losing a single white pikmin is a significant loss not only simply because they’re so hard to come by, but also because losing all pikmin of a certain type is a way to reach a point of no return. Example, in the boss rush dungeon, the Holes of Heros, I lost too many water breathing pikmin and wasn’t able to recover an item sitting in the water without so many, meaning I’d need to revisit it later. When it came to the white guys, since no other pikmin could handle poisonous obstacles, you had to take extreme care to protect them, to not use them for anything outside of their unique functions lest you risk your progress being blocked, they were by design the most valuable pikmin.

Talk about… uh… ouf… I’m not so sure about this joke… but uh, talk about white, p, pikmin...

You had to clutch, as long as you had one left you’d be able to dig up treasure, which was not an unlikely scenario, but without any, you couldn’t proceed. And that sucked, majorly, it sucked that poison was as much of a common threat in the dungeons and overworld as fire but that you were never ever given the opportunity to grow as many of those guys as you could fire-resistant ones. Even worse, in one instance, in the dungeon titled “the citadel of spiders”, the game wouldn’t even post on the requirements that poisonous ones were needed even though digging was involved, forcing you to abandon a hidden underground treasure and be punished you with a repeat playthrough later even though you did nothing wrong. Also, causing you to lose trust in the posted asks.

And what’s worse is that, through challenges assigning so much importance to preservation of the poison pikmin, they invalidated a whole aspect of their design. One of the points of these dudes was that sacrificing some in fight would poison your enemy, something that was never worth the price. White pikmin were invaluable because without any left you could be totally blocked, so letting one of like 25 total die just to drop a few notches on some health, it’s not worth it. Even if I lost half a set of red and yellow and blue pikmin in a fight, these are guys I can restore in like 2 minutes as soon as I get back outside. Getting more poison guys means re-entering old dungeons for a total of 5 new ones, WOW.

Even outside, in the overworld, there was an abundance of poison walls to demolish, more than electrically charged ones if I’m not mistaken, not to mention more buried treasures. The idea of giving different colors of pikmin different abilities makes things fun, it comes from the adventure genre but allows you to consider them during combat and strategy sections, but as sooooon as they throw poison your way, which they almost always do, that changes. Pikmin stops being a composite action/adventure RTS, it becomes ‘don’t lose the poison boys’, and that’s boring and dumb and there’s no reason it had to be like this.

This could’ve been fixed one of two ways, 1) allow purple and white pikmin to reproduce more seeds in the overworld, because, like, why not? If they’re gonna exclusively used for puzzles, sure, restricting their acquisition to dungeons alone is passable, but if you’re gonna tell me to go demolish a wall for a whole day with a literal handful of pikmin, get outta my face unless you’re gonna let me plant more seeds, point finale.

Or, option 2, gets this, you could’ve made poison behave more like fire. Fire spouts always have a cooldown time where any sort of pikmin can attack them to disable them. Fire enemies can only be taken out by fire dudes sure, unless you trick one into walking into some water, making them vulnerable to water guys too.

The implementation of poison and poison pikmin in the game is trash, sorry, it’s trash. It overused, ruins many moments and can’t be justified.

Or like, I don’t know, you could’ve always provided white flowers whenever there was a level that needed poison or digging. Any of those would’ve fixed it, but no, instead what we’re left with is a game whose expectations don’t match the resources and tools provided.


Conclusion:

So does this ruin the whole game? No, it kind of nullifies the whole absolute fairness in the dungeons, but when it’s not included the game burns hard and hot. Aesthetically, the game is still gorgeous, the great writing from the last game returns but at a scale quality that’s almost unbelievable, especially for a nintendo game. Each item and enemy has two sets of reports to read about it, the freaking game sets up a taxonomy for its creatures, at the end of every day you get mail from your boss and get to hear about how he’s on the run from the mob until you pay off the dept.

The game’s dungeon’s, despite having randomness at play in their generation, do follow some sort of logical procedure for positions of enemies and obstacles that always makes for a really challenging experience. Their look, some as dark caves, others as abandoned sewers, and others as some sort of toybox world, they’re all unique and cool and allow for the game to expand its content without having to add whole new maps, which of course means more space for more treasure, treasure that is very special for the reasons discussed already.

The few simple rule changes in dungeons change the gameplay completely. Having experience in the overworld is an advantage, but it there’s so much more to consider down here to make it through these impressive gauntlets with as few losses as possible. What was cool was that practically every mechanic in the game had at least one dungeon section dedicated to testing the player on it, even the most seemingly irrelevant things like storing pikmin, which is something that one of the greatest dungeons in the game, the submerged castle, uniquely tested you on. Originally I set out thinking I wanted to just cover this dungeon in this video, but decided if I’m going to do this right I’d rather give the full context for the game in a video much like this and then follow up with a piece specifically about that one level, so that’s what I’m gonna be doing next, sorry for the tease lol.

The inclusion of 2 checkpoints at which high scores were presented meant the game could still appeal to fans of the old game, though, while it was cool to me, there were a lot of people who saw a lot of value in the pressure applied by the 30 day time limit and missed that in the sequel, finding pikmin 2 very boring. This is something that pikmin 3 would famously find a middle ground between, but we’ll get there later.

Pikmin 2, unrestricted by the same factors as its predecessor  was able to show up and fully define itself as a game. Pikmin 2 was about finding things, really interesting things hidden both in plain sight and in the deepest depths of the darkest dungeons. Pikmin 2’s removal of a global fail state meant it could take of its gloves and just hammer you down with challenge after challenge, with 0 consideration spent on fairness in most situations. It did however have one fatal flaw which, when present, would reduce the game to something less than what it was.

Pikmin 2 was a poisonous game in the sense that it infected you and motivated you intrinsically to continue collecting items without regard for outcome, it played with your natural state of curiosity by rewarding you with things that you considered valuable without direct use in the game world. It was poisonous in the sense that it was permanent, your failures could not be reset, you started as healthy as you’d ever be and would have to fight hard to reduce your rate of decay just enough to make it to the end of a challenge with enough strength left. And it was a poisonous game in the sense that… there was a lot of, well, poison.

And, uh, that’s how this one’s gonna end…





When I was a kid, there was this one game I would try and try and try but could never beat. Pokemon Stadium 2. The gym leaders and elite 4 are notoriously difficult, and when playing against them with nothing but the crap rental pokemon, it feels like the odds are highly stacked against you.

So that’s why when revisiting it for a project I was working on, I did so through emulation so that I could exploit the game and make it actually possible to capture the final battles. Originally I was planning a video on the architecture of pokemon, the design patterns used in designing the software’s structure. Two snags though, the original pokemon games I was looking at were written in C, meaning modern reverse engineering tools wouldn’t work, there weren’t any classes back then, just structs. Second, when looking into the more modern games, really the most interesting thing was an application of the Builder Pattern, which is cool and all, but I can’t make a whole video on that, that’d be short.

Okay, look, here’s the gist of it. Okay, you know how there are multiple contexts in which pokemon can appear? From inventory to box, from battles to fashion shows? Yeah well this special builder ensures that only the attributes of a pokemon that are needed given a context are carried into each situation. Yup, cool, that’s it. Video done, thanks for watching HELLOOOO AND WELCOME TO THE ENDSCREEEEEEEN!

But, here’s the thing. While playing and messing around with imports and exports of game save-states, I noticed something really interesting that would have been impossible to observe without performing such exploits, and this discovery, while behaviorally insignificant, has forever changed the way I’ll look at the old pokemon games.


So let’s break down one of the main mechanics in pokemon, attacking. So, pokemon is a turn-based game where each player picks an action, and then these actions are executed during an action phase. During that execution is where the majority of the game’s combat related processed occur, where damage is calculated, health is reduced, and probabilities are applied. The attack thunder for example, being as powerful as it is, only has a 70% chance of hitting it’s mark, the other 30% it’ll just miss and the turn will be wasted.

So what I always assumed was that, during run-time, during that action-phase where the game just processes the outcome of a turn, I assumed that was when the game would decide whether or not an attack would hit. You know, you choose thunder, the attack starts, a random number is generated and based on it the game decides what the attack will do.

But that’s why I was careful before, I said that this is the point at which the probabilities are applied, not processed, because unbeknownst to the player, the outcome of every move in the game is determined before the match even beings.

Now, full disclosure, I haven’t actually seen the lines of code that do this because C just isn’t very readable to people like me who’ve been raised under the graces of java, but even if I had, it wouldn’t have mattered because the pokemon red source I was working with wasn’t actually reused when making the n64 stadium games. So while I can’t prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that this is exactly how it works, the explanation I’m about to give of how the game works is functionally identical to however it's actually implemented.Through some research though, I’m leaning towards it being a pretty accurate assumption though.

So basically, instead of generating random numbers as needed when attacks are launced, before the start of a match a whole collection of random numbers are generated and stored in some sort of structure. Then as the game runs, once an attack is selected, rather than the attack itself performing the necessary processes to determine if it’ll hit or not, the system instead just pops a number off the top of a random collection and hands it to the attack to make all of its checks.

So just quickly, the basics of making decisions with random numbers, which by the way is in no way accurate to how the game works, just giving you some base understanding. So let’s say each random number generated is between 0 and 100. Now when the Thunder Attack is called, a random number is passed to it for processing. Since the accuracy of Thunder is 70%, the program might check if the number is less than or equal to 70, which assuming perfect statistical randomness in the number generator has a 70% chance. Then another check might be done, if the number is, for example, not just lower than 70, but also lower than 5, aka a 5% chance, the move won’t just land but will be a critical hit, doubling the damage.

From my testing, I’ve cornered the moment this happens down to right here during this screen. I can’t tell you if it happens at the beginning or after you leave it, but at some point here, the random numbers that serve as the deciding votes on everything that’s about to happen in the upcoming match, they’re all made and stored at this point.



So after observing this, what are some of the reasons one might opt to pre-generate random numbers for later use in a game like pokemon stadium rather than just make them as needed?

Well, the first and least interesting answer is for performance. Depending on the performance of the random number generation, it might not make sense to run it in real-time during pokemon matches while all sorts of other things are running in the background as well.

Well, despite how complicated that description of choices with random numbers may have sounded, this is really typical stuff in programming, this sort of thing can be done in milliseconds, even back on hardware like the Nintendo 64 home console. You’re typically not doing intensive input or output, you’re just doing some math to make a random number. The time needed is negligible.

I looked into the frequency of random number use in other n64 games for comparison and nothing really indicates that there was an issue with the speed of these operations. So you know the bobombs in Mario 64? You know how they blink when they’re chasing after you? Yeah well apparently that’s controlled by a random number generated about once a second. Mario doesn’t use much rng during gameplay but seems to use ot for aesthetic things, supposedly capping out on some level at a rate of 10 random number requests per second, with like, no performance issues.

And when you look at the context in which a random number is needed in a pokemon match, I mean, you only need to generate a few every attack. I mean, it’s probably possible to do it all with one, but let’s assume the worst case where 4 are used: one to determine a hit, one for critical, one for status effect, and another just for special moves and include some other random choice, like metronome.

So like, in the worst worst case, you need 4 fully fleshed out randoms before an attack is run, which is nowhere near the peak mario hits by necessity, and it probably nowhere near what pokemon could hit when you consider that while a turn is being executed, nothing else in the game is happening, like, there’s user-input, there’s not loading or unloading of assets, like, the entire stage is loaded, the animations are loaded, like, everything is there.

So while pre generating the random numbers during a menu where really nothing else is happening might have a slight slight impact on the game’s battle performance, it’s probably so inconsequential that its negligible, and honestly it’s kind of smelly.

I mean, of all the entities in the game, what should be responsible for determining if a hit attack hits? Well, the attack, duh. The attack is the one that knows its own accuracy after all. So why is an external generator making these decisions and passing them down the chain of command? It’s just kind of weird, but I mean, again, a player is never expected to ever know this.


So digging for answers, I looked into this more. See, the thing about random numbers is that, like, they’re kind of hard to make. I mean you’re probably familiar with rng in games, right? It shows up all the time. But have you ever sat down and just thought, like, how do you generate a random number?

Generation is kind of a thing that follows a process, machines are things that do things. How do you make an algorithm or function that can output literally anything. Well to spare you the details, you kind of do and don’t. Most random number generators use methods that aren’t truly statistically random, meaning that patterns can be recognized and they can be predicted with time.

For encryption and systems where security matters, this is really spooky. One of the places this is the biggest issue is in Internet of Things applications, or IOT, like, stuff like toasters and refrigerators and other random devices that connect to the internet for some added functionality. A lot of them have really poor RNG, making it all that easier for them to be attacked. Remember two winters ago when the entire internet just got torn to shreds? Yeah, that was because large networks of hijacked smart coffee machines and the like started blowing up traffic all over the place. Random number generation is really really important, and you should care about it. If you can have access to the black-box that everyone looks to to have their random numbers served to them, then you can break into just about anything with significantly less effort. Just ask the NSA who’ve been known to install backdoors in random number generators used in encryption systems.

I know my audience, I know most of y’all have never given this sort of stuff a second let alone a first thought to this. There is spooky stuff going on all around you and you should really really care.

So in games, the quality of random numbers doesn’t matter that much. Nobody’s gonna try to predict your randoms, but what you do want is to ensure that no observable patterns are repeated that ruin the experience for the player. Maybe sometimes you’ll want to rig your own randoms to make consecutive values less similar, that’s something I ended up having to do in my stupid spongebob space shooter.

In pokemon stadium 2, the random number function used is this


Again, full disclosure, this comes from an article on bulbapedia which didn’t cite its source for this specifically, but did include references to where it got details on the rng in future generation pokemon games. So I can’t confirm that this is actually what it uses, but from what I’ve read about rng on the n64, this seems reasonable and we have no reason to outright reject it. You just have no idea how hard it is to filter “rng challenge lets play” videos from searches for “pokemon stadium random number generation”.

Now you’ll notice something there called a seed. You’ll also notice that I never really answered that question about how random numbers can be generated. So this is a really basic function, you’ve got a multiplication and an addition, no biggie, but most of the better functions you’ll see around make use of something called a seed.

See, mechanically it's really hard to generate a real random value because nothing about an algorithm is random. What you can do however is neatly pack up some entropy from an external source and inject it into your function to make something significantly less predictable.

If the system your operating on has any access to the outside world in which things uncontrollable from the inside occur, then you can pass that along to the random number generator. From the temperature of the computer’s components to the current datetime to even static interference floating around from the freaking creation of the universe, all sorts of things can be picked up and used as a seed in a function like this.

So according to my very reliable source, in pokemon stadium, the seed used does come from operating conditions of the n64’s hardware and the last generated random value, and then based on this a random number of random values will be generated and then mashed together in an XOR to give a final result. So like, as far as the generation goes, it’s still not that performance intensive, and it goes above what’s minimally needed for a game like pokemon, especially given the time. This could be done in the background over the course of just a couple of frames, if more than one at all.

I always thought when I was a kid that it took into account things like idle time during the attack select menu, like, it would reward you with higher critical hit chances for faster decision time, but sadly no, the randomness comes from a count register.



Anyways, alright, here’s the point we’re at. The Pokemon stadium games don’t generate random numbers live in battles right before attacks are executed, but instead premakes a ton of them before the start of a match.

So, what does it matter? Um, it doesn’t. I mean, from a user’s perspective, whether the random numbers are generated ahead of time or at the moment of use doesn’t really matter, since from their point of view the values and the process by which they’re generated is obfuscated. I mean, yes, generating them right before an attack would yield different results since the register’s extracted entropy would be different, but like, does that matter? No, not really…

So why did I make a whole video about something that doesn’t matter at all?

I don’t know, I kind of just wanted an excuse to cover random number generation, and idk, I just think it’s kind of cool.
I mean, again, not that it matters, but think about this. Before a match begins, all possible outcomes of it already exist and are exploreable, the deciding factor of the effectiveness of every action about to go down is already written, your destiny is printed in a stack of numbers, its already there, you just don’t know it.

As I was playing, I frequently ran into situations where no matter what choices I made, there were no paths from my starting state to a success state, just because the speed and stats of my pokemon didn’t shake hands well with the random numbers already set up for me.

That’s kind of how I discovered this. There was one match where I used thunder and it missed, so I reset my state and tried again, and it missed again. No matter how many times I reset the state of the emulator, the attack would always miss.

But once I noticed this, my behavior playing the game changed. I now longer just used previous save states to hard reset matches I was losing, I started holding on to multiple states throughout the duration of a match, using one master branch to explore the furthest depths of the battle’s possible outcomes and random numbers. I would start observing the rounds at which an attack would miss, at which they would inflict a status effect, at which they would be critical hits, and then with this knowledge, I go back to the initiation of a match and start making weird decisions mid game that in the immediate moment didn’t make sense, but I was playing the long game.

If I know that on turn 4, the first move will be a critical, then I need to delay for a few turns by switching pokemon repeatedly and then ensure that my pokemon out is faster than the opponent’s on that turn so that I can get get the critical rather than them. I could use it defensively too, switching to resistant pokemon on turns where I knew that a status effect would normally be applied to my dudes. The cool thing though is that status effects can be hijacked too, so if the enemy poisons or paralyzes you on a turn, if you manage to reset and use a poison or electric move on that turn yourself, you’ll be the one to get the status effect on them.

It’s super weird, but once I discovered this really pointless use of pregenerated chances, I just, I couldn’t go back to playing normally. Despite knowing I was just purely exploiting the game, it was fun. Battles now became huge events to explore all of the possible outcomes of in order to optimize my strategy. It was like groundhog day, but a game, and like, on a smaller scale than majora’s mask.

AND event using these crazy cheap approaches to battles, mapping out all possible outcomes, I would still get stumped from time to time when the late battle randoms just were not favorable to me. Some matches were still unwinnable, even after having my hand in the random stack. So I’m glad I discovered this, I don’t feel so bad that I couldn’t beat them as a kid. I mean, of all the matches I played, about 1 in 10 was unwinnable based on their pokemon selections and mine at which point the numbers are already generated. Knowing that, since you have to fight all 4 elite 4 members and then your rival, all in a single session without saves in between, the probability that at least one of these matches will be unbeatable by you once you start it is over 40%. Like, that’s nuts.

Time travel mechanics in games are mostly exactly what you expect going into them, which isn’t to say that they’re bad, I’m just saying they’re typically always used in a lot of the same ways. I don’t really know any turn-based rpgs where you can roll-back turns, and despite it not being an expected use-case by the developers of pokemon, deciding to implement random number generation the way they did for whatever reason allows, through memory exploits, one of the coolest time-travel rollback style features to exist and be used.

A match that would typically be decided in just a couple of minutes can now have hours of time spent studying every possible scenario and exploring ways to reach desired states at the desired moments and be the enemy’s perfect opponent.


Splatoon (Attempt 2)

Welcome to our next stop on the Road To Metal Gear Solid 5! Today, Splatoon!

So recently, one of the youtubers I’ve followed for a long time, Matthew Pattrick, got a pretty remarkable opportunity. He, as part of an international group figures of the Youtube community, got to meet with Pope Francis, my goodness could I have ever predicted I’d be saying this.

The purpose of the meeting was to hold a discussion together on the subject of the internet and how to use it to “improve the lives of younger people”. Despite what you might think, the Pope wanted to focus on the positive aspects of the net, how rather than dividing us, it allows people to come together, to interact with each other. 

The youtubers were there because they’re people with large reach, especially over the youth (probably more so than world leaders, including the pope, which is maybe a concern), and whether they like it or not, they serve as entertainers and inspirators, and not the kind that sucks, uuuugh stop with the french jokes!

Everyone was asked/expected to bring the Pope a gift representing their country and culture, and after some hard though, Mr. Patrick, head of the GameTheorists channel, determined that the most appropriate gift he could offer would be a video game. Despite how cringy it sounds, I get it. I mean, the guy is there to represent the Gaming sector of the web, he’s a content creator who focuses on video games, it would kind of be lame for him to offer anything else. After all, the Pope is bringing them to him so he can learn things about them, he’s kind of expecting this sort of thing.

So stop for a minute, think of your favorite game, and now think about how disappointing it is that Matt Patt gave the Pope a steam code for Undertale.

In a video, Mr. Pattrick explained why he made this choice, and while I think he did a great job explaining why he this game is so good, he didn’t do a good enough job explaining why THIS is the game that he should have given the Pope at this particular event.

His choice kind of bugged me, and so I thought about how I would tackle the problem. The Pope invites me to speak with him about how the internet brings people, especially young people, together in positive ways, and asks me to bring him a gift representing my internet community, gaming.

The easy yet incorrect solution is to give him a game I want him to play, a game that I think is really cool and will make him learn something THAT I THINK IS IMPORTANT FOR HIM TO LEARN about games, pushing my own agenda. The thing is though, the man has called me here for a purpose. He wants to open a discussion about a very specific subject, and so the correct solution is to give him a game whose themes align with those of the meeting. HE wants to learn about something, and he has asked ME to TEACH him.

It’s easy to imagine the sort of game you’d offer him, I mean, one of the clear features it must contain is multiplayer, but it also has to be kid friendly and community driven. And quickly, I don’t want to waste time on this, but while Minecraft might come to mind, I would argue that it’s community, especially on youtube, can actually guide kids into more mature content. If you’ve ever seen a child surf through minecraft youtube videos on a smart TV as I’ve heard is a pretty normal activity now, you’ve probably seen how easily they can find themselves watching some pretty intense stuff. Sure, more and more child friendly channels are popping up, and yes, some big creators who’ve realized that the majority of their audiences are kids have begun washing their mouths out, but it’s still not the best.

So as you can tell from the title of the video, the game I concluded would be the best to offer to Pope Francis, given the context of the group discussion and the topics he’s trying to talk and learn about, would be 2015’s Splatoon.

You know how you can take just about any game and boil it down to “This game is about X, Y, Z main features?”, you know, like, Mario Kart is about Racing and chance based weapons, Metal Gear Solid 5 is about Open Worlds and stealth action, or Medabots is about juggling and partner commands. Well when you look at everything Splatoon is, does, and has, like I did when I first got it about a month after launch, you barely see any focus. It feels at first like totally random and pointless features are sewn together in some senseless fashion. Nothing really seems to make sense until you realize that Splatoon is about Network Features and Accessibility, yeah, the game is literally about being online, the same way a game like BFBB is about incremental difficulty.

Literally every aspect of the game falls under one of these main themes, if you will. And the ultimate goal of the game is the result of this formula, 

Network Features + Accessibility = Community

Trust me on the math, I’m almost an engineer.

As usual, I’m going to save the best for last, so first, we’re going to talk about the game itself, and its accessibility. Yeah, the least cool part about the game is, well, the game, that’s just a taste of what we’re in for. You see, Splatoon, out of the box, is less of a game and more of a service, an entry pass to one of the coolest experiences I’ve personally ever had with a game. When you boot the thing up, you don’t start in the game, you start in a plaza, this is where a lot of the cool network stuff happens. But to get to the actual game, you have to walk all the way across, onto the stage, and through these doors. So what I’m saying is that this is the structure of this video, first we’re going to talk about all of the gameplay on the other side of these doors, then we’re going to talk about all of the sick network features that are accessible back out here, and finally, we’re going to talk about all of the different ways these two main themes of the game meld together seamlessly to build an environment and activity perfect for a community.

So the game, what’s it about? The game is a third person shooter where the goal, rather than killing enemies or capturing sparsely place objectives, is to have more captured area held by your team at the end of the round. How is area captured, by covering it with ink. That’s it. It’s the simplest thing to explain and the easiest concept to observe in action, understand, and strive for.

Right away, you can feel the accessibility of this. Oh hey, how do you play? See that ground that isn’t your ink color? Paint it! Go!

The developers openly admit to playing other massively successful multiplayer shooters both just as regular gamers, and as part of their research for this game, and you can see how they came to the design decisions they came to.

STRUCTURE FOR GAMEPLAY TOPICS
Sometimes, multiplayer shooting games can get way too complicated. You throw someone in who’s never played before, sometimes they’re halfway through a round that can last upwards of 20 minutes, and good luck trying to explain to them objectives if they’re in any mode other than deathmatch, especially if they’re in a mode where their team and the other team have different mission goals or rules to follow. They have no idea what the point is, where to go, how to use their radar, who the enemies are, who their teammates are, jeeze they can’t even tell when they’ve just been killed! Like I said when we looked at God of War, game designers need to come up with ways to stop alienating new adopters and focusing only on experienced or advanced players. The idea is, if you’ve never played a call of duty before, picking one up now is gonna be hard. Splatoon though, everything about the game is built to avoid those sorts of situations.

First of all, rounds are 3 minutes each. 
Number 1) That means anyone can play anytime. Everyone has 3 minutes to spare on a round of splatoon, and it means rewards are dished out often and quickly. Don’t want to end the night on a loss? All it takes is another 3 minutes.
Number 2) That leaves tons of room for advanced tactics. I mean, so the game is about covering the place in your color of ink, right? One of the first things you discover or teach yourself about the game is how scoring must work. When you start off a match, the ground isn’t covered yet, so coloring each unit of space gives you, say, 1 point. Later on in a match, once the action has kicked up, probably 30 to 60 seconds in, the entire map is painted. Now it’s not about covering new ground, but coloring over the color of your enemies! Each time you re-color a unit of ground, that’s worth +1 for you, and -1 for the opposing team, meaning relative to the actual score, that gives you 2 points!

The rounds are 3 minutes, and no matter how well you play throughout the whole round, all you're judged on in the end is the ratio of coverage at the last second. So you have to decide, what’s the best way to spend 3 minutes? Defense? Offense? Set up traps?

Is it worth pulling a full assault at the beginning? Because any capturing you do within that first minute, especially the ink you drop further into enemy territory, is almost guaranteed to be re-colored at least a dozen times during the remaining minutes. But hey, maybe that push is all you need to make an opening for your team and move the fight further down the path, away from your base. Is it a better idea though to try to hold your own territory steady and only go into full on attack mode in the last 30 seconds of the battle, when the enemies have less time to undo any changes you make to the paint? But what if you mess up? If you die trying to act boldly, that might give the enemy the opening they need to make a break for your base.

So the short match duration makes it easy for anyone to play, but also keeps the game hot.

Next, everything about the game is made to ensure that it’s as fair as possible. There is absolutely no worry about balancing weapons or objectives or anything. You see, sometimes multiplayer games, to be more truthful to their source material or spice things up, include game modes where opposing teams have different objectives. A good example is the new Star Wars Battle Front. In Walker assault, the Empire’s goal is to guide their walkers to the rebel base and destroy it, while the rebels are tasked with destroying them before they reach it. Depending on the team the game throws you into, you’ll have to try to complete either one of these different objectives. The problem is, because the teams are facing off unevenly, there are balancing issues. That means that just based on the designs of the competitive challenge, one team has an easier task, and thus an unfair advantage. In Battle Front for example, Walker Assault on the Endor stage is almost impossible for the Empire to win without playing an absolutely perfect, dominant game against the rebels. Most of the Walker Assault maps are pretty imbalanced actually, the only one I really think is alright is Hoth, and even that seems to be won by the rebels remarkably often.

Tons of time and effort is spent trying to balance games like this for players, because when problems make it through, it sucks, and people get upset.

So how does splatoon not only solve, but completely avoid this issue? Well in other games, it might make sense for the terrain to be all funky, having both teams start at opposite ends and rush for eachother. In splatoon though, you don’t get points for kills, only the amount of ground covered, so it’s clear to see how if teams started off in completely different areas with different layouts, one team would always have an advantage.

In splatoon, both teams start off on opposite ends of a map, but in exactly the same place. How? By each map being perfectly symmetrical. Yes, every stage in the game is just half a stage followed by its mirrored copy. This ensures that each team, justly, has the exact same space to cover, has a sort of arena style area in the center of the stage, that no matter which side you start on, the game always looks the same to you, and that when you venture into enemy spaces, you know exactly how to get around because it’s literally the same place you just came from, just now you're covering it with ink in the opposite direction.

It’s crazy! Sometimes when an enemy pulls a trick on you in a game, you have to wait a whole round to exact revenge, but in the game, whenever an enemy pops up out of nowhere and surprises you, they’ve actually just taught you about a vulnerability on their side as well, since everything is symmetrical. I actually didn't realize this immediately, but when I did, my mind was blown in the best way possible.

Next, navigation. If you’re unsure what the point of a mission is, of course you’ll get lost. In splatoon though, the rule is pretty clear. You don’t need a radar, a compass, or even a north star. See any ink that isn’t your color? Go there, and make it your color. Same goes for team mates. As long as you’re not colorblind, you can tell at a glance whether someone is friendly or out to splat you. This way, without even doing anything, the developers are able to ensure that you fall into this perfect feedback loop: Seeing a lack of color causes you to go there and paint it, painting allows you to move faster through the ground and recharge your ink, moving faster and recharging your ink allows you to move to the next non-colored section you see to cover it in ink, allowing you to, again, move faster and you get the point.

On top of this, the game mostly declutters the screen of UI stuff by leaving all of the navigation tools on the gamepad screen. Here, you alway have a view of the map, allowing you to spot your teammates and enemy ink locations at a glance. You can even tap another player to super jump to their location at any point, making it super easy to get where you want to go as quickly as possible.

But back to what’s on screen, man, the interface is super efficient. I mean, sure, you have the timer, live score and super meter charge all thrown up at the top, but the rest of the UI is embedded within the design of the character and sound effects. No weird stat screens or displays to look at. Wanna know how much ink you have left? Look at the tank on your character’s back. Wanna know if you have enough ink to use a secondary weapon? Check to see if the light on the top of the tank is on. Wanna know if your super meter is charged for a special attack? Forget about that stupid meter up there, just wait until you hear this sound “wrrring!” and watch your head light up in flames letting you know you’re ready to go! Which also, impressively, conditions you to look out for that sound and that fire head when facing off against enemies, letting you know when they’re ready to unleash a kraken on you.

Controls (gyro to aim)
So something I mentioned back in the God of War video was how many people have difficulty understanding the dual stick setup that most games use. One stick is character movement and the other is camera movement. In a shooting game though, you need that extra control, you need to be able to move your perspective separate from your movement. Back when the wii first launched, that solution was solved by providing the user a physical representation of their weapon built into the interface. Pushing a stick to look up might confuse people, but pointing your remote upwards doesn’t. Splatoon isn’t played with a remote though, so instead, it uses gyros in the controller to control your view. That’s why, as you may have noticed, the aiming controls in the game look incredibly smooth and precise. It rivals the responsiveness and control of a computer mouse, but offers the ease of use and understanding of a pointer. It’s crazy cool, anyone can pick it up and understand immediately how it works. Not only that, but I just love how it feels to be moving the controller around to turn corners and quickly adjust your aim to take out a bad guy. I also think there’s something really cool about playing multiplayer games with motion controls. Every Time you get killed, you actually know that someone in some living room on some other side of the world didn’t just point and click at you, but physically had you move their body to aim their reticle at you, that’s just something I like to think about.



Old people playing
Now this time, I’m not going to just say that a game is super accessible and expect you all to believe me, trust me, I learned that from God of War. Though to be fair, there is an episode of elders react where they play God of War and perform pretty well, and actually I was going to do this whole segment where I would get my dad to play and then get his feedback on it, but I never had time for that… But anyways, while researching for this video, I actually randomly stumbled upon this reddit post about older people playing the game. Turns out a ton of parents play the game, that’s how easy it is, and what’s cool is that it brings families closer together. I don’t know if it was the same for you, but in my generation, parents typically don’t participate with their kids in their hobbies, and it’s cool to hear stories like this where parents bond more directly with their kids. But jeeze, this game is just breaking boundaries. For one 42 year old mom here, Splatoon was pretty much a gateway into the whole gaming culture, and now she’s into streamers and stuff, that’s crazy.

Here’s a good quote from a 41 year old to end this point on:
“Splatoon defies age boundaries [...] along with race, gender, nationality, and any other unnecessary divisions a person could come up with. Which is why I play it gleefully and unapologetically! It's an amazing anomaly in the gaming world and deserves as many different kinds of players as the world can serve up.”

And he’s absolutely right. In splatoon, none of the characteristics you or anyone else think define you matter. You’re either a kid, or you’re a squid, that’s it. It’s all about staying fresh.



Now, if you’re a splatoon veteran, you probably know that what I’ve been talking about is only one of the game’s few match types, Turf War. This mode is the standard, most important mode in the game. It’s the introductory mode, and actually at one point, back when I started, it was the only mode in the game.

Now there are all sorts of ranked modes like Splatzones, a special type of turf war where only particular areas count for points, Tower Control, a really cool spin on tug of war, and Rainmaker, a cross between a tug of war and a reversed capture the flag, where the flag is actually a weapon. It’s some pretty cool stuff.

So while these modes are different, the core things you learn about the game in turf war still apply, it’s just all about how much emphasis is placed on specific tasks, like ground coverage, defense, offense, and navigation. It’s not like core parts of the game don’t matter anymore. Like, sure, now you’re not being judged by how much land you cover, it’s not the case that covering ground is a waste of time in these modes, you’re still making space for your team to travel through and recharge, and you’re charging up your special meter.

So these games are all played with a variety of different weapons. You have a couple of main classes, normal guns, paint rollers, sniper rifles, ink brushes, blasters and buckets. Each weapon has its own strengths and weaknesses, comes in a pack with a secondary weapon like bombs and a special move, and the most successful teams are those that balance their weapons. All snipers on turf war? Well, you’re in for an easy loss!

So now that we understand everything on this side of the door, let’s slowly start easing our way back and take a look at one of the first community features, the map rotation.

So, as usual, to those who might not be gamers, let me explain. Typically, the way online games work is that you start off in a matchmaking state. The system tries to find you a game session, and once it does, it plops you in. Most games feature a decent amount of maps, these are the battlefields, the levels, the stages on which the game takes place. In the lobbies, sometimes players are given a chance to vote on maps, but others times, maps change randomly, instead allowing players to leave whenever they want and search for other sessions by map.

In splatoon though, even though there are 16 maps now, much more than the 4 that came with launch, the game only ever allows players to play on 2 maps at a time. Well technically 4, 2 for turf war and 2 for ranked, but whatever. In every region, every player in the game is restricted to these few maps, in fact the game even tells you when you boot it up in a sort of newsflash which maps are currently being played. This immediately gives people a sense of community. Literally everyone in North America playing this game is playing on the same maps as me, and in a few hours, everyone, including me, will be notified that the maps have changed, that’s crazy! Just the amount of websites out there that spawned to countdown map rotations is insane, and an excellent demonstration of how strong this community is.

And what’s cool is that, I’ve never played a game like this, with a regional based map rotation. And what it feels like, and I’m saying this now but keep in mind it applies to everything else we’re going to talk about, is that the game devs took a step back when making this game. I mean, first person shooters have existed for a long time, and once online multiplayer became a thing, it became the norm to attach a whole multiplayer mode to these games. Hey what’s cooler than playing call of duty? Playing call of duty against real people! And as the years have gone on, no one’s really taken that extra step, made any serious innovations. Online games are always about nothing more than hooking up and fighting other people. We’re at a point where games that don’t even feature a single player mode, like Star Wars Battlefront, still follow the same path that every other game does.

But splatoon, it’s like, they backed up and said, holy crap. Guys, we can connect people via the internet. We can build software systems that allow people to interact with each other via a network. This, this is an incredible thing, so why is every online experience so mediocre? Why do all of these games look the same, man the market is so heavily saturated it's nuts! What if instead of coming up with a game and then tacking on online features, we actually started there, at the online part, we make sure every feature in the game benefits from or uses the network to some capacity. The idea of connection is our core theme, community is our objective, this needs to be the focus from the beginning, and we can’t lose track of this. That’s what it feels like.

Map rotation. Sure, we could have players vote, but who cares? It’s been done a thousand times! No, players are going to be brought together, taken to  the same couple of maps, this is cool! This will give players something easy to talk about together, something they’re all experiencing together.

Now, while you’re out playing matches against people and stuff, there are many reasons the game has set in place for you to return to the main plaza and chill for a little bit. The first reason, tied directly to gameplay, is the Cat. You see, for every map rotation, you get a freshness title. This title gets better and better the more consecutive matches you win. Once you feel like you’re satisfied with your score, you can quit the matches, go meet the Cat, and he’ll give you a bonus amount of points depending on your title. The key thing here is that the Cat is outside. Yes, this bonus score system could have been reserved for the lobby screen or something, but it’s not, it forces back into the plaza, and while you’re there, hey, why not check things out, there are plenty of distractions to catch your eye.

The main feature accessible only from the plaza is the miiverse posting, this is the base, the minimum core of the community. The plaza is a forum where people can exchange thoughts, write little funny notes, describe ideas. Gameplay allows people to interact directly and competitively, but this area allows people to engage with each other in much more meaningful and valuable ways. Don’t get me wrong, one side of the door is not more important than the other, they both feed off and provide for each other. The game gives the community context, and the community gives the game content. But the idea is that, maybe without realizing it, tons of features subtly force the player back to this plaza in order to trick them into becoming a part of and contributing to the community.

After a couple of rounds you leave to get your bonus score from the Cat, then walk around to see what other people are saying about the game. After learning some new stuff and listening to people’s thoughts, maybe liking a couple of statuses, hey, you might feel inspired to leave your own note. But whoa hoa hoa, the quality of some of this stuff is pretty good, you can’t just post anything. So you make a serious effort, you write something good, something you think people will like or care to read, and BAM you’ve been lead to contribute to the community, all because of a big fat cat.

Of course, the Cat isn’t the only entrance to this patch that ultimately leads to posting a miiverse status, and it’s also not the only one attached to gameplay.

One thing that a lot of multiplayer games do these days is allow for character customization. Sometimes these things are purely aesthetic, but in some games, splatoon included, these pieces of clothing may play a role in the game, for example by giving you special abilities, perks, or stat improvements. So this is a standard thing most games needs, but whoa hold on, we can’t just add this to splatoon for the purpose of the game, every feature needs to benefit the community in some way. So how do we use clothes to sucker players into leaving games and re-enter the plaza?

Well you might think it’s as easy as placing the shops outdoors, but you’d be wrong because the game actually allows you to warp between stores by a tap of the screen or press of a button. So how did they elevate this feature with community focus? Well back in this alley, there’s a character who runs some sort of black market thing. If you let him know about an article of clothing you want, he can try to find it for you. The reason this is important is because the shops don’t actually show you all of the available clothes in the game, only a select few every day. So another way to shop is to walk around the plaza looking at other players, inspecting their outfits, and placing orders for their clothes on the black market. Of course, this method of shopping forces you to take note of people’s posts and messages as you approach their characters. And not only that, but the guy can only take 3 orders from you at a time and each item takes a whole 24 hours to get, meaning that for each order, your forced to make at least 1 trip to the plaza, one walking around reading all of the posts and checking out everyone’s clothes, and one to come back and pick up the order, potentially inspiring you to take some more time to place another order.

On the surface, this feature seems so simplistic and bland, wow you can order other people’s clothes, but once you realize what the true purpose of it is, how well hidden this community engagement tactic is designed, you really learn to appreciate Splatoon for all it offers.


Finally, the most impressive and interesting feature in the game’s arsenal that draws people to contribute to the community through miiverse posts, is what happens once one is actually posted. The goal of writing a message, status or post is clearly to have others read it and respond to it. As we’ve already seen, other people’s messages can be read above their heads in the plaza, and obviously our own posts appear over our avatar’s head in other people’s games, and while that’s cool enough, that’s just the beginning.


Posts made by users actually appear in-game in various different ways. The first time I noticed this it was because I spotted a picture of squidward drawn on a wall like graffiti. I thought for a bit that I had discovered some crazy easter egg, but when I realized what was really going on, that all graffiti throughout the game is sourced from user’s drawings and messages, I was very pleasantly surprised. Now it might seem like a gimmick, but again, it’s just another way, and but probably the best way, to trick people into contributing to the discussion.

You see someone else’s message on the wall and you say “Hey, I want to put one one of my messages on the wall”, so you start up a post and whoa, hey, this is going to be something people see around the game, I can’t waste my time, it’s gotta be cool. This system sort of guarantees that all posts written by players will be made with the full intent of them being displayed to all sorts of other players. BAM! Not only is the game guiding you to make posts, but it does its best to ensure that your posts will be good!

Iwata
One interesting consequence of a system like this is that when global events occur, just like on social media, you’ll see people referring to it and discussing it in Splatoon. Now that support for the game is over, looking back at it, one of the most powerful moments I can underline, the event that made me realize just how big of a deal this game was, took place shortly after the death of Mr. Iwata. To those who don’t know, Mr. Iwata was the long standing president of Nintendo, the company responsible for this game and just about any other good time you’ve had since the GameCube. After his death, many players took some time playing his company's games as a way to honor him. I know there was a pretty big surge back into Mario Kart 8’s online mode, but I went to Splatoon. I was looking for an easy, good time, but was shocked when I entered the plaza. Everywhere you went, drawings and messages were left in mourning and tribute. I remember playing turf war on Saltspray Rig when I turned a corner and saw a big in-game poster hosting a drawing someone had made of Iwata, and it kind of stopped me in my tracks. People were using a platform that he was behind to honor him, it was so surreal. This was like nothing I think anyone’s ever seen before, it was really strange, but it showed how dynamic this game’s community system was.

Just a heads up, if you haven’t already seen it, I highly recommend Gaming Historian’s video, the Life of Satoru Iwata, link here and in the description: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4cJh2YgrKE

But anyways,

Finally, there’s one last thing the game does to get people engaged. So the gameplay is fun and easy to get into, and the community has all of the necessary tools to flourish, but everyone should know that every community needs maintenance and moderation. Without any proper upkeep, the game’s following and user base are sure to drift off. What could possibly be done to ensure that people stick with it and continue to contribute?

Splatfests

Splatfests were these awesome regional or worldwide events that would take over the game from time to time. Every few weeks, a regional or sometimes worldwide poll would be made, and every player on the game would be prompted to answer it. Questions ranged from the classics like Dogs vs. Cats or roasting marshmallows vs. hotdogs, to some sponsored topics like Spongebob vs. Patrick or Autobots vs. Decepticons. After picking a team and getting a shirt, and at 6PM the coming Friday until midnight on Saturday, the game would host a massive online event for all players. Players who chose one option would face off against players who chose the other option to see which side could get the most victories and points over the next 30 hours. In the end, special prizes would be awarded to players depending on if they voted with the majority, if their team won, and how much they contributed to the worldwide team’s overall score.

I’ve gotta stop for a second and acknowledge how many times I’ve used the word “contribute” in this video. When we talk about games, like, if we set up the phrase “players X this game” and asked ourselves to replace the X, it’s probably be with verbs like “play”, “enjoy”, “criticize” in my case, or “dislike”. What I don’t think we hear often enough is “contribute to”, so I feel like it’s important to notice that.

Anyways.

Often games have employed very primitive looking tactics to get players back into their game’s for short periods of times, like Call of Duty’s Double XP weekends. Splatfests though are something completely different. The normal game modes don’t exist, they’re actually inaccessible over the days of the event, only splatfest mode is available, and it’s awesome. What’s really important though is that rather than letting the fans doze off, it wakes everyone up and gives the community something to talk about, something to argue about, and something to fight over. Would you rather go to a costume party or a fancy party? Let everyone know! Share your opinion with the world, and fight to prove that you’re right! 

It’s a really cool concept, and it’s a real shame that at the time of this video, the last one has already taken place. These things actually brought me back to the game after more or less forgetting about it a couple of times, and they mostly always went down without any issues.

That is of course with the exception of the Early Bird vs Night Owls one. I mean, they’re literally dividing players into teams based on the times of day they can play, did they really not anticipate players from opposing teams not being online at the same times? I mean here I am on team night owls, it’s almost midnight, and not a single early bird is around to fight. Half the time the game matches me against my own team just to give us all something to do. Man, that one was a disaster. Really funny, makes for a great story, but yeah, whoof.

Not only do these global events give everyone something to talk about, but the whole look and feel of the game changes just for that limited time, and through this, they once again lead you to make posts. Splatfests are the only time you can see splatoon at night. The plaza and all levels have a custom night theme. It’s a party going on, the characters are jumping around, music is blasting, the whole place feels so alive. Even the freaking weapon demo area, one of the few places in the game you can venture off to alone, is in the dark, and the closer you are to the door, the muffled music is. This is just some awesome attention to detail.

The main plaza is just lit up, brighter than you’ve ever seen it. Bright neon signs and fireworks draw your attention, and you realize that all of them are generated from everyone else’s posts. This is probably my favorite part of Splatoon, and discovering this for the first time is something I wish I could go back to. Each team has a color, and on each side of the plaza, all of the billboards and signs of that color come from members of that team, posting messages of encouragement to their fellow players or trying to trash talk the opposing team. Even during matches, you can get distracted by drawings and notes written by other players that are pinned around the area. During splatfests, the game comes alive with player generated content, it’s like nothing you’ve ever seen before, and it urges you to make your own post, write a cool message for your team mates, hey, maybe everyone will see it on the big screen. Man, like, straight up, that’s one of the coolest things I think I’ve ever seen having to do with computer games. This game is bananas, absolute freaking bananas.



Now before concluding, I wanted to mention a couple of issues I have with the game because I think it’s important not to gloss over things, but I’ll be honest, I looked at this game from every which angle and I really only found two, yeah, literally a couple of things I thought were a little bad, and neither is really that detrimental to the overall experience anyways.

First, now watch how nitpicky this is going to be, but the timer between matches is really weird. Like, if you pay attention to it, you’ll notice that it sometimes freezes or skips numbers and bounces around. It wouldn’t be an issue at all were it not for the fact that you can’t quit out of the lobby, which itself WOULD be an issue were it not for the fact this is in place, along with the map rotation, to try to balance the weapons equipped by players in the matches, preventing people from going all-snipers or whatever, BUT it’s made even less significant given that the game allows you to play this goofy little mini-game on the gamepad screen while you wait.

And second, buckets are kind of useless. Like, they’re cool and everything, and the big selling point was that they allow you to launch ink over walls, but I mean, blasters were already able to do that. Buckets launch ink up and out in a curved trajectory, but blasters shoot a trailing ball of ink straight out which pops at a certain distance away and drops ink below it. I mean, from the looks of it, blasters are actually better because you have more control over how you aim them and shooting them immediately gives you a straight path to swim through, and they have more spread. The only benefit to buckets is they normally have a good rate of fire, but they could have just made blasters shoot faster and boom, you have buckets. I don’t know, it just bugs me. One of the only really pointless features in the game.
Splatoon is an incredibly fun, addictive, and accessible game, and while it's changed my expectations of multiplayer games and network features in games, it’s made me a little upset to realize that it took until 2015 for anyone to even look at these standard inclusions from a different perspective.

Now let me tell you one last thing before the send off. When I first heard about Splatoon, I was sceptical. Everyone was raving about it, but I wasn’t sure if I’d enjoy it. I read reviews, I watched videos, I read posts where people shared strategies and tips, but I still wasn’t convinced. The price of games these days forces you to really have to validate every one of your purchases. You wanna know what the selling point for me was though? One of the articles I read mentioned the planned updates and maintenance for the game, how right now only a couple of maps, modes, clothes and guns were available, but that over the course of the year, tons of new stuff would be added regularly and a bunch of events would be held. New levels, new items, worldwide weekend tournaments, all free.

Now, with most games that release along with scheduled batches of additional content, normally it makes sense just to wait until it’s all there and then just buy the special edition that includes the whole intended experience right out of the box at the best price. But when it came to Splatoon, I realized that it wasn’t like that at all. Being a part of the community as it grows, as the updates pile up and the game changes, THAT’S THE INTENDED EXPERIENCE you’re paying for, and as awesome as it is, it only lasts for a limited time. The later you hop on, the closer the train is to its final destination, the less time you have to enjoy yourself on it. I was afraid I’d miss out, I was afraid I’d look back years later and say to myself “man I wish I had played that game while it was alive”, that’s something I’d never thought to myself about a game before, and that’s what sold me on it.

This game brings all sorts of people together, and hopefully my explanation of its community features have allowed you to at least understand why I think it would have been appropriate game to give the pope, man, why did I start the video off with that? What a dumb idea, jeeze. Please, next time I start a video off talking about the pope, please stop me. That’s almost never the way to start a video lol.

I am so sorry if this video served as nothing more than a message to you that you might have lost a chance to be a part of something you think would have been cool, but the point is that when games boast these sorts of community features, it makes sense to take a risk on them. If they don’t end up being all that great, you have no one but yourself and the other players to blame, but I guess I’m a bit optimistic when it comes to stuff like this, I don’t think anyone wants to have a bad time.

I’m happy with how Splatoon turned out, I think most people are, and I can’t wait to see how the technology and design behind it gets inspires other game projects in the future.

Thanks for watching!


References

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-intersect/wp/2016/05/31/pope-francis-met-with-a-bunch-of-youtube-vloggers-heres-what-he-told-them/

https://www.reddit.com/r/splatoon/comments/48y6kx/alright_how_many_old_people_play_splatoon/

Older gamers talking about Splatoon. A lot of them talk about how it was for their kids, but now they play it too. It’s a good bonding experience. A 42 year old mom got into watching streamers because of the game. THIS GAME IS BREAKING BOUNDARIES!

“41! Splatoon defies age boundaries, in my opinion, along with race, gender, nationality, and any other unnecessary divisions a person could come up with. Which is why I play it gleefully and unapologetically! It's an amazing anomaly in the gaming world and deserves as many different kinds of players as the world can serve up.”


https://web.archive.org/web/20140717214508/http://kotaku.com/nintendos-big-new-multiplayer-shooter-is-very-nintend-1599846116
Call of Duty thing




Resident Evil 6

Hello. This is the the third time I’ve tried to write this video.

So 2-3 years ago I started two series of critiques simultaneously, the idea was to be looking at one that lost it’s quality overtime and another that discovered itself over its titles. The two series were modern Resident Evil (starting from 4) and Pikmin. Lets see how far we got? RE4, RE5, and Pikmin 1, whoooopsie! Better late than later gladiator.

All in all it’s good that we’ve waited so long to finally talk about Resident Evil 6. See, back then the way I tackled videos was little different, I was adamant on calling them “look-backs” rather than reviews, just as I am now when it comes to calling things critiques or video essays, that’s the new hot term on block. These days I try to pick like the one most important thing I have to say about a game, and then I structure the entire presentation around that. There’s no reason to do a full feature coverage, it’s kind of a waste of time.

So, as you could guess, there’s one really important thing I want to get across to you about RE6, but it’s not the sort of thing I can just tell you, we’ve gotta get there first. As was the original intent behind the series, we’ll start by looking back at the old games and seeing how RE6 turned out the way it did.

So, RE4, one of my favorite games of all time, in the video on it, the thesis boiled down to the game having excellent pacing. It’s kind of like you walked into a restaurant and the waiter was like “hello and welcome to resident evil 4”, for your first course we have a combat scenario where one weapon or strategy is the best, and next we’ll serve you another combat scenario where a different weapon or strategy may be most appropriate, and after that we’ll serve another combat scenario where another weapon or strategy is going to be most useful. Unlike other games *cough cough the last of us* which have you doing a lot of the same sorts of scenarios in succession, RE4 says no way jose! In the video, I traced out a few scenes that showed this very well. One moment you’re in a confined space, the next you have much more distance between you and the enemies, the next it’s confined again but the enemies are invisible, from one room to the next the game almost always had some combination of familiar elements to show you that you hadn’t seen before, and in all other cases it was introducing new features to you.

Case and point, the enemy type El Gigante. If you haven’t played the game in a while, you may have forgotten that you actually fight this boss 3 times, and each encounter has the game’s variables tweaked in such a way that they all manage to feel unique. The first time, you fight him alone in a large open space, unless you saved the dog at the beginning of the game, in which case you’ll have a slight advantage. The second time, you fight him in a narrow pathway, making it very difficult to get passed him without you or Ashley being hit, because in addition to the change of environment you also have another character to look after now. This also takes place immediately after a large fight with a ton of enemies, so odds are your ammo stock isn’t so great. The third and final time you fight el gigante, you fight two of them in a much smaller room, but you do have a zipline you can use to make it around them and trick one into falling into a lava pit.

Each and every time the enemy itself is the exact same, same behavior same everything, but the environments change, whether or not you have a partner changes, the point at which the boss fight appears in a sequence of other events surrounding it changes. It’s the same dude 3 times but with minor changes that feed the encounters to you at a good pace.

Resident Evil 4 is all about pacing. No two sections of the game are identical, no two sections could be switched places and have the game flow as nicely. Every room has been designed to serve a purpose at the immediate moment that the player enters it from the previous room. Try to think of two sections of in the game that could be swapped, that are completely identical. Go for it. Think of any two bosses you think challenge the player in the same exact way and could easily be exchanged. You can’t, because there aren’t any. Resident Evil 4 is all about pacing.







So, did RE6 inherit good pacing from its predecessor? No, but neither did RE5 and we already discussed why in that video. RE5 committed a significant amount of its focus on one addition, the co-op partner system. I won’t bore you with the details, but basically the now fully multiplayer campaign was incompatible with some of the features of RE4. It’s as a direct consequence of the inclusion of online play of the story that trying to properly pace the game made no sense. Since the game couldn’t have dedicated save areas throughout the level, it had to adopt a chapter system. Since players would always need the ability to play the game, it was made possible for the game’s chapters to be swapped between and jumped around in any order. This is also why the idea of a weapon shop or merchant was removed. Well experienced players can always go back to replay the first chapters of the game with players on their first playthrough, introducing them to weapons and equipment that haven’t seen yet. If there were a physical merchant like in the old games, what’s the logic for which weapons he should sell? What does the other player do while their partner is shopping? They tried a little bit of the old pacing by offering most weapons to the player to collect for free throughout the game, this only worked in the case of a player doing their first playthrough without connecting to another player online and without repeating previously completed chapters.

But ultimately you can’t blame them for not pacing it as well. Why bother trying to repurpose situations or build interesting sequences if the players have the option to break them? So instead of pacing RE5 tried its best to offer Variety. Just in case you’re interested btw, pacing is kind of reliant on depth whereas variety comes from the breadth side of things.

In RE4 you may have had multiple different kinds of the same situations, but in RE5 you have a bunch of different situations. You’ve got the level that’s in the dark, and the level that’s a turret thing, and the treasure hunting level with the boat, and the one that’s a puzzle challenge. Most situations are unique, but not because they offer different combinations of familiar features and mechanics, but because they mostly introduce new gameplay elements that never get reused or come up in any way as you progress.


Now in the case of RE6, it’s a bit weird. There definitely are plenty of unique new features introduces in each chapter, but there’s also an overabundance of the same sort of stuff. Every scenario in the game can kind of be tackled the same way. You can punch and kick and shoot enemies, and then progress to punch and kick and shoot some more enemies. Sometimes, yeah, there’s a train passing by that you have to look out for, or, um, enemies that parachute in from the sky, but that doesn’t really change how you’ll be behaving as you play. Even bosses are very repetitive with long drawn out phases and poor feedback. You just kind of shoot people a lot and watch brownish-red splook splooch all over the screen, until, like, they change shape or something.




Now, as you may have observed, RE6 much like the game one notch before it features a partner system. If you’ve seen my RE5 video, you likely remember that being a major talking point for me and that I have a pretty good understanding of how it works. And hold on a sec, look at this drawing: (FSM), okay, now you do to.

So how did the partner system work in RE5? I’m glad you asked! Basically the partner system causes the game to be playable in 3 different ways, 2 of which aren’t the worst thing a human can experience in their life, and the other, well, um, you knoooooow…

The game features two main characters who complete the chapters as partners, so the game allows you to have your partner be controlled by a friend in split screen play or via online connectivity. This works for strangers too, meaning you can kind of drop in and take control of another player’s partner at any point. In the case that a player is not playing online and doesn’t have an extra controller and/or a friend, the game provides an extremely rudimentary state machine to control the other character.

The problem was that playing with this really poorly behaving partner was the one experience that would be common to all players. Everyone at some point played with it and felt the same frustration as a result. You see, though the game dropped its pacing, it was still a “survival horror game”, and what that boiled down to back in 2009 was that resources like ammo and health were really scarce. Now this partner, yeah it was simple, but does that immediately disqualify it from being good? No, of course not. You could definitely imagine a situation where a bot like this could be useful, for example a typical first-person shooter game, having a partner that you could command to move forward or stay back as well as heal you when you’re hitting hard times, that would be great. One situation you could imagine it not being great in would be a survival horror game, and therein lies the issue. The two most critical resources that require the most attention in managing, health and ammo, were expended by the partner like there was no tomorrow. The partner seemed to behave the same regardless of their current weapon, targeting a single enemy at a time and never using ammo preserving melee attacks. It would also frequently waste health items that if held for a longer time could potentially be improved. For these reasons, many people treated their partner as a sort of mule, giving them only non-consumable items or not giving them any weapons, basically just using them as an extension of their own inventory. Now doing this with your partner meant playing a version of RE5 that was dominated by their behavior, not yours. For example, it makes more sense for the human player to use the machine guns in the game as they can fully utilize their ability to stun and melee attack enemies, something the bots can’t do, instead just hittin that full auto and emptying the ammo reserve in seconds. This means though that the player needs to sacrifice one of their other guns to the partner, most likely the shotgun in the early game. But you know what’s fun? Playing a zombie game with a shotgun. Why do I, a human player who paid money for a console and game have to make concessions for a robot that’s supposed to support me and improve the experience for me? I am still salty over not completing my first playthrough of RE5 with a shotgun, can you tell?

The crappy partner was a major point of issue many had with RE5 and taints the legacy of the game to this day. You can’t really talk about the 5th main Resident Evil game without bringing up the bot controlled partner. Furthermore, as more people are introduced to the game via remasters and re-releases, the now smaller than initial player-base and winding down of online support means that someday possibly soon, playing solo with the bot will be the only way anyone can experience RE5.

So they knew that nobody liked the partner, and it stands to reason that they would try to address these issues in the follow-up game. What did they end up doing? Well, they sort of looked at the biggest issues with the bot in the game and applied a patch that would improve the players experience. They made the bot less overbearing to the point that it’s almost unbearing, like, it’s as minimally bearing as it can possibly be.

This means that the player isn’t forced to change their actions to suit a cold-hearted and stupid robot, they have full control over the game and their choice to play it the way they want to play it. How was this achieved? Well, couple of points for you


The partner’s health is infinite and concealed from the player.
The partner’s ammo is infinite and concealed from the player.
The partner never gives or uses items on the player.
The partner’s behavior in combat is slightly more complex but overall undomineering

And that’s it. That’s why I’m comparing it to a patch. They took what was established in RE5, and instead of reworking it for improvement, they just took what wasn’t working and put a big bandaid over it. “Oh people don’t like having the partner wasting their limited health items ammo? Okay, well the partner is just invincible now and and never needs to borrow ammo, and just magically has all of the same guns as the player, all the time, done!” And you know what, this is pretty decent. It’s not the best, but just getting the partner out of your way is a major improvement. It’s great to be able to actually play the game alone. Of course, you still have the same local and online multiplayer options, but the fact that single-player isn’t necessarily a worse experience is great. Well, no, that’s wrong, it’s not that it’s great, it’s just how it should have been from the beginning.

There are a few things that they removed unnecessarily though. In the last game, the player could command their partner to go around the area and pick up items for them. In this game, that never happens, so while you walk around collecting goodies, the partner continues fighting and it’s a bit of a bummer.

But at the same time, there are partner elements that were just barely explored in the previous game that this one expands upon. When you think of successful multiplayer co-op, you probably think of asymmetry, but Resident Evil 5 had, I believe, 4 moments where the partners get split up during fights, and none of those lasted very long either. Resident Evil 6 on the other hand is constantly throwing these curveballs at you, forcing the different players into different roles depending on the character they control. When you’re with a friend, these sorts of moments are especially interesting, often one player will be covering the other while they complete some sort of objective on the ground, or one will drive a vehicle while the other shoots. Sometimes players will just be separated by physical barriers, often for puzzles. They were probably only able to add these sorts of situations into the game as a result of the context-sensitive behavior of the AI partners, allowing them to act normally enough during these sections. I mean, the partner can now actually assist in puzzle solving, well, if you can call this assisting, but hey, it’s better than the last game where the partner just stands up on the little pedestal and waits for you to solve the puzzles for here, not even freaking coming down when enemies start attacking. I can’t stress enough how many moments there are like this in the game, where both players are doing different things, it’s a really big improvement and makes the game’s partner system feel much more warranted. Still though, this is kind of how it should have been from the beginning.


So pacing is gone, and the partner system is technically functional now, but not in the way it should have been. They were only able to make the patches they did because of the leaks that existed and were found by players in the last game. Because of that, I don’t feel comfortable just saying “yeah, here’s a check on this random checklist”, so here’s a dash instead. Assign whatever meaning to it you want.




Finally, lets get into probably the most important and apparent change that RE6 introduced to the series, the somewhat overabundance of action. You see, the term survival horror was coined by the first Resident Evil, kind of making the ever growing series responsible for the meaning of the genre. Ya boi CJ made a great video recently on horror in games and broke down three scare tactics, anticipation, jumpscare and emergency. Back in the day, those first two were super easy to do, but emergency was hard to instill in players without proper resources. So that’s kind of what RE4 added to the genre for the first time by bringing over more action-game like mechanics. It managed to balance everything though, it spooked you, it made you struggle, it was great. Resident Evil 5’s first acts kept in line with the idea of survival horror, only falling off later on, but those earlier chapters are still credit worthy.

RE6 though, it kind of takes the survival and the horror from survival horror, and well, chucks them. Make no mistake, this is a Resident Evil game, but it’s not survival horror, it’s action. The game is full of over-the-top set pieces and combat sections and explosions and quick time events. I mean, the most fire you saw in RE4 was in a single section towards the end where a helicopter pilot supports you briefly before dying, and in this game you go from tumbling around a cliff in a bus to getting your plane hijacked by the man of a million nipples over here and then crash landing it in china. The wacky situations this game puts you in are insane! It’s nothing like the old resident evil games, it’s such a weird shift in tone, and it’s almost funny how seriously it takes itself even after all of this.

I mean, on a smaller scale, one of the most controversial additions to the game was free melee attacks, punches and kicks and finishers grapples and all of that. See, the older games had these, but you execute them you needed to first stun an enemy which you could only do at the expense of a bullet or flash grenade. These moves were great for crowd control and served as a way to preserve ammo. Why shoot a guy three times for a kill when you can shoot him once, then punch him and possible knock out a bunch of people around him? In this game though the decided to make it possible for players to pull off these attacks whenever, at the expense now only of a stamina slot which regenerates naturally and quickly enough. Funnily enough, the stamina slots weren’t used by any other moves, so you could do your rolls and slides and sprints as much as you wanted UNLESS your stamina was empty. It was weird. But anyways, including these super powerful attacks showed from the getgo a greater focus on action in even the simplest of combat encounters.

In previous Resident Evil games, a single enemy places in the right situation could be a serious problem. In this game, small groups of enemies can easily be taken out with a combinations of pure melee attacks from you and your partner, no need to waste a bullet. This alone was enough to greatly disturb the balance of the game’s other systems, most notably ammo. In the other games, you were meant to always feel like you were low on ammo. In this game, 30 minutes into the Leon campaign and I have 48 handgun rounds in reserve. In the old game, a single handgun mag was 50 and was about the max you could expect to have at any given moment. In the first 30 minutes of RE4 you’d be lucky if you had 10 extra rounds on you at a time. By the third chapter of the game, I was literally full of ammo. I was needing to manage my inventory every time I wanted to pick up a new weapon.

The game throws away a lot of classic features from its series in the name of action adventure. I mean, so in the old games, all of the weapons were available for free in the game right? But they were well hidden so that they acted as a reward. If you missed them, the consequence is that you’d have to spend currency to buy them instead. In my first playthrough of RE4 for instance, I missed the first shotgun in the house, I never even knew it was there until many playthroughs later. In this game though, new weapons are indicated on your map. Why? Because wouldn’t it be LAME to miss a gun? Yeah, so here it is! There’s also the fact that you can now move while aiming among other functional and some kind of purely decorative additions to mobility. Giving the player more movement options makes both evasive and offensive actions much easier to execute with minimal planning or preparation. You can now sprint to run away, but also to unleash a powerful charging smack.

Even some of the modern additions like weapon upgrades were removed in favor of something more action and multiplayer friendly, enhancements, kind of like perks or loadouts that you can pick before starting a game. The familiar skeuomorphic illusion of an actual laser pointer being emitted from your gun is present, albeit more realistically, but is now also surrounded by your typical video-gamey crosshairs. And speaking of aiming, you can, for no apparent reason, dual wield handguns now too. Like, it slightly raises your rate of fire and decreases the accuracy, but that barely justified its inclusion as a feature.

Talking about killing off that excellent pacing in the old games, I’m not kidding you when I say that the last quarter of the Leon campaign is straight up ONE BOSS FIGHT, against this dude who’s official job is as a National Security Advisor! First, you start on this train and it’s total insanity. He’s turned himself into like a dog or something, and he’s running and you’re ducking in and out to pop shots at him, but he’s also got some sort of machine guns mounted on his dog face thing. Then, after crashing the train off a bridge into the water, it quiets down and you do some spooky stuff, but then he turns into a giant T-rex! He’s straight up a freaking dinosaur! And this dude in a jeep pulls up and you shoot him for a bit until you can’t anymore, and every so often the dude will like vacuum pack all of his guts back in and turn into a normal, albeit topless dude so that you can give him a few good whacks. Then there’s this ridiculous scene where you’re on an elevator and the thing breaks and you’re climbing the cable up this building that’s SO TALL you can’t even see the ground. You’re just hanging over a straight freaking void! And THEN, after you punch the guy a few more times and you take like a million bullets to the back like its nothing and some weird lovey dovey stuff happens, the dude turns into a giant fly and you’re getting tossed around like a ragdoll and there’s zombies all over the place and he’s absorbing them for energy but there’s a giant metal spike you can pick up and if you stab him with it it’ll attract lightning which damages him and you do all of this, badabing, you get a rocket launcher, badaboom, blow him up, the dude falls back down the thing, lands on a spike, his blood drips onto the floor in the shape of the Umbrella corporation logo, the HYPE credits play, badabingo!

It’s, it’s so not resident evil. This, this is over-the-top crazy action, this isn’t what the last two games, especially the 4th one were about. This is what just about all discussion of this game sounds like, I even participated in it myself at one point.

What you hear a lot of is
“Resident Evil 6 is not a Resident Evil Game”, and I’m not questioning the validity of this, I agree, I think this is a fact. What I’m asking is whether or not this idea merits any attention. Basically, if we all agree that Resident Evil 6 is not a Resident Evil game, why are we judging it like one? Why are we comparing it to games it has nothing to do with. Why don’t we instead, just, like, I don’t know, judge it for what it is rather than what it isn’t? Maybe compare it with games it actually IS like?



Resident Evil 6 as an Action Game

So scrap this, it means nothing, let’s start from the beginning. What kind of game is Resident Evil 6? Okay, so like, you know when you were a kid and you’d go to the movie theater and they had an arcade meant to mop up your loose change while your parents waited in line for you? I remember at my theater there was this game called Ocean Hunter, you’d like shoot at these spooky sharks and fish and stuff, my brother and I would try out hands at it every time we went to a movie, we never got much further than the kraken boss fight though. If I had to guess though, you’re probably thinking of something more like House of the Dead or Time Crisis, the sorts of games that are best enjoyed with a friend and break down into total goofy chaos unless you’re both intimately familiar with the game. It’s just full of over exaggerated stuff popping out at you, every scenario trying to top the last, this rush of mad gunfire and screaming at your partner, screaming at the crap screen, just yelling, freaking out, having a great time.

That’s what Resident Evil 6 basically is. It’s that idea of some crazy co-operative adventure, but with full control and a whole lot more content and depth. It’s not meant to be taken so seriously, you’re just supposed to have fun with it, and when you play it that way holy crap is it a good time. I feel like it’s about time to mention that in preparation for this video, my friend CoolPants and I completed a playthrough of the Chris and Piers campaign together over the course of like 2 days or something. Some of you may have been in attendance at the live stream I hosted of it, and if you weren’t, CoolPants made a highlight reel of the stream’s best moments, link in the dunkeroo, honestly, just, like, what you’ll gain from watching that video will probably do the point I’m about to try to explain with words more justice.

So while wrapping things up, CoolPants felt like he didn’t enjoy the game, what he did agree he enjoyed was the time spent playing it. The time wasn’t wasted, the game was a conduit for us to have a blast through. Yeah, some moments dragged on, but some gave us opportunity to laugh and get to know each other. I feel like the different between he and I had to do with our expectations. I was expecting exactly what I got because I was already familiar with the game and what it offered, I think he was hoping for more of a traditional Resident Evil experience. And I can’t blame him, I felt the same way the first first time I played it. In fact, I made a couple of rant videos on my second channel at the time of playing it, which are now private, don’t ask me for them, they’re bad, but I was so frustrated with the game for not being like RE, for not being what I thought it was. But after playing a few more times in multiplayer and getting to know what the game was like, I was able to have a good time all of these years later.

I should have prefaced this by saying that I wasn’t actually expecting to have AS good of a time as I did. In my RE5 video endscreen posted all of those years ago, I made a request to anyone willing to play the game online with me for the video, and you can tell how much I was dreading it. I was mostly remembering how long the game was, and yeah, I mean, if you look at it from a video making perspective, the length of the game is awful, but that’s not a typical use case so it doesn’t matter.

But it’s worth mentioning, the game is LONG, and aside from a few moments of just pure padding, I’m talking about you hangar sequence, it’s pretty dense.

Again for the sake of full-disclosure, specifically for video capture in this video I only played through the Leon and Chris campaigns, but be aware that prior to this, as a younger boio when the game first came out, I made it a point to complete 3 playthroughs of each main campaign, one solo, one in split-screen-co-op and one with strangers online. I also did 2 playthroughs, solo and splitscreen of the SPOILER ALERT secret Ada campaign you used to unlock at the end. The thing apparently is unlocked immediately in new versions of the game though, so be warned, don’t play it until you’ve played all of the others, if you care about the story.

End of this side track, but if you want my advice, here’s the best way to play the game. The Leon campaign I think is best played alone or with strangers online if you can still find any. The Chris and Jake ones though are most enjoyable when partnering up with someone you know either locally or over network. The Ada campaign I think can only be played co-op locally, and I’m not gonna tell you why, but I highly highly recommend you couch-co-op that one. It’s, it’s amazing.



So pacing? Guess why it’s not there? Because it doesn’t need to be. Those arcade shoot-em-ups were all about ridiculous mission after ridiculous mission, and that’s what this does. It makes it much more fun for online play. I mean, even though you could drop in anytime into anyone’s ongoing game online in RE5, there were some chapters that if you got popped into, you’d be pretty disappointed. You have no idea how many times I’d randomly connect to a dude doing the boring el gigante turret boss fight on hard mode that takes like 10-20 minutes of constant shooting. It was so boring, and you know they were only there because they wanted someone to carry them through it. Ugh, it sucked.

This game though, by eliminating all of those sorts of moments, the ones I was talking about, like how the game introduces a new thing for one chapter and then ends it, by not doing crap like that, by keeping most chapters very similar, anyone you connect to for a game will be doing something interesting for you.

Now things like most of the combat encounters being similar make sense. It’s not that the game is bad for not being like RE4, it matches it’s new genre, action shooter, it meets the requirements of this instead. Suddenly things like a multiphase boss battle taking hours also make more sense. Each phase is like a level, you can pop in for a few of em and then drop out, join someone else doing something else later, you can play the game at your own pace and your own leisure. Why? Because it’s not a survival horror game, it’s an action game.

Why can you now sprint and roll and slide and punch and kick? Think about it. The game isn’t crafting an experience for you room after room anymore, it’s not forcing you to try different strategies in every sequence, it’s not reusing or reformulating challenges, so instead it relies on you experimenting yourself, and to do that it needs to provide you with a broad set of interconnected and deep actions.

Imagine if RE4 was the same sort of room every time, if you fought el gigante 3 times but each time was the same as the first. Add on top of that limited control options and I’ll be the first to say that’d be a pretty junk game. Give the player though the ability to run, punch, do finishers, do these stupid freaking rolls, to dual wield at the press of a button, well now it becomes less crap because the game’s challenge now becomes to use most effectively this greater ability set. It’s not just running and aiming, it’s so much more and true mastery requires knowing the best time for everything and how to best work as a team.



I mean, you want rock hard proof that this game commits FULLY to the action genre? You open up the menu right, and like, the game gives you options and settings for all sorts of things, allowing you to tailor the game’s systems to your needs. You can decide whether or not you want the camera to shake, what kind of reticle you want, how the camera should orient itself while you’re sprinting, your various aiming speeds, just all sorts of things you don’t necessarily expect because you never had the option in the last games because they were designed with a very specific experience in mind and they gave you the exact controls you needed for it. There was no need to be considerate of player preference due to the genre, but now there is.

And this might sound dumb, but you know what’s really impressive is that all of these settings are fully customizable live-in game, even graphical things like brightness. I mean, yeah, whatever but back in 2012 you’d typically need to exit a game to change settings like this. At any point you can just decide “you know what, I’m not feeling this laser pointer right now” and change it on the fly.

And you know what’s even crazier? Every character has like some sort of phone device thing that is a physical representation of your GUI, and everyone has a different one, so the menu navigation and inventory management look different depending on the character you’re playing as. This is an insane amount of polish.

And don’t take that point too lightly, this was originally the thesis of my first attempt at writing this script, that “RE6 is one of the most polished games ever”. Every part of this game just goes above and beyond what you’d expect, from the visuals which are breathtaking for the PlayStation3, I mean, DARKNESS! They got darkness right? I kept playing with the brightness on the game and my tv, I thought something was wrong for me to be seeing so much blackness, but like, that’s just how it is, and it’s fantastic! When you’re out in the night with that short visibility, relying on lightning to give you brief snapshots of your surroundings, holy hot popsicles dude is it sick. But from stuff like that to little things like the menus and UIs. I mean, what is this menu? I have no idea what it is. I think it’s just like a page where you can go read documents and files you find throughout the game, but like, the whole menu is a rendered room with these display cases for each campaign these cool dioramas depicting scenes from those chapters. It’s absolutely not necessary, 90% of players won’t ever see this, and in most games that would mean there wouldn’t be much to see. Why spend effort (aka time and money) on things that barely anyone cares about? No matter what you do or where you explore in this game, you’ll rarely find any sharp edges. Yeah, okay, sometimes characters speak without their mouths moving, but LOOOOOK at this campaign select screen. Look, there’s a different animation in the shadows for each set of characters based on the things you’ll see in their missions, kind of like the dioramas. This isn’t just a nice touch, this is like weeks, maybe even months of work on the things you’re seeing right now which most people would barely spend a glance on.

And here’s what I wanted to say about this in that original script. The gaming scene today is very very weird. Games get released not just without a nice coat of paint, but often times full of bugs and issues, sometimes even actually incomplete. Metal Gear Solid 5 is an incomplete game, I spent over $150 Canadian dollars on the collector’s edition of a thing that wasn’t finished. Straight up, the the metal CD case with the collector’s video dvd thing in it had space for two discs. Were there supposed to be two discs? Actually, no. I thought at first I was missing some until I googled it and realized it was just the one. So why did they package it like that? My guess is they just had a bunch of these cases lying around and used them to save money in packaging the COLLECTOR’S edition of an INCOMPLETE thing I paid EXTRA human dollars for.

So to travel back in time just five years and see a quote-un-quote unsuccessful game push sooooo much content for FREE is just, well, kind of disappointing coming from where we are. I mean, you still had to pay, but what you were paying for was finished, it was massive, and shiny all over, not just in the most important places. I mean, like I mentioned, the game featured 4 fully realized campaigns split up into 5 chapters each, so in total there are 20 of what are essentially really long levels. Each one typically takes minimally an hour, good example, CoolPants and I spent a weekend doing Chris’ campaign. That’s 4 weekends of constant arcade style action, but only if that’s what you want, because each of these chapters can be played 3 different ways and can be replayed multiple times with new items and loadouts and skills and even partners.

And that’s not even mentioning the pure multiplayer mode, the mercenaries, an actual arcade style mode where you have to build combos of enemy kills either alone or with a partner before an extendable timer runs out. This is a staple of the series now, but this game probably has the best version of Mercs Resident Evil has ever had, and that includes the whole dedicated mercs game. Each player's equipment and your loadouts make sense, and if you’re going to play online you really need to be able to operate as a team player. The additional controls and maneuverability make it much more fun though, it’s far less predictable and cheesable than the other mercenaries games.

It’s a shame that nobody really gave the game the recognition it deserved. Like, if something with this much content came out today, holy crap people would flip. Like, it’s as polished as those old whacky arcade games, but like, all the way through. From the opening to the final rushes, it's a gorgeous game. I mean, even the plot is well structured around the 4 playable perspectives.

For those of you who don’t know, the game’s 4 campaigns are intertwined, characters will often bump into each other and complete scenarios together. When playing offline, the game runs all co-operative characters as AIs, which is really impressive, but when connected, there’s a chance that the people you run into are two other players playing another campaign and who just so happened to be at the same part as you at the same time as you. This, like, this is an incredible feature. There’s an entire critically acclaimed game based around this idea alone, and it’s just one facet of RE6, a much grander game. The game sometimes even does this without telling you, like, okay, so in this part of the Leon campaign, you have to defend yourself from this robot security system before chasing after Ada and running into Chris and Piers along the way. When you later play the Chris campaign, you realize that Chris was going through the same sort of challenge in a room next to where Leon was. When playing as either character in either campaign, if you get a good peak through the glass, you can actually see two AI controlled characters on the other side doing the same challenge as you in real time. I’d never noticed this until these playthroughs for the video. There are a ton of resources being spent here to have this moment work the way it’s working, and ultimately most people won’t even learn of it to appreciate it. They might as well have not made the glass transparent, not actually put the characters on the other side, and most people wouldn’t have felt any different about the game.

I mean, a feature like this, it costs money, and in any development environment every amount of effort needs to be justifiable somehow otherwise it’s a waste. If making this feature won’t add any value to the product, then why waste time on it? Well, probably because the people behind this weren’t looking at it purely as a product.

Speaking of features that must have cost a bunch of money and nobody even knew were in the game, did you know that in the single player mode the partner can be given specific commands? Like, you can point out a specific enemy and set your partner to target them until they’re dead. I also didn’t know this until this video, I accidentally stumbled upon this information on google. How does nobody talk about this? Or about how the partner will dynamically enter different states depending on the situation in order to better serve the player but also not play the game for them, seeing as how it now has unlimited health and bullets.

And why doesn’t anyone talk about the special ways the partners are used in the game’s singleplayer? Like, sometimes, depending on certain contexts, partners will perform scripted actions that are purely aesthetic, for instance in this section of the Leon campaign, Helena, the partner you get if you choose to play as Leon, will run off ahead of the player. This is because Helena and here sister were recently kidnapped and held in this location, and Helena is hoping that her sister who’s been missing might still be here somewhere. The partner isn’t just a gameplay system, it’s also usable by people responsible for keeping the narrative going. In the old game, this sort of behavior in the partner would have needed to be presented in cutscene, but here the game demonstrates a significant amount of effort spent for the sake of immersiveness through a state change that, again, most people won't even realize. It’s so completely natural for a person in this context to behave this way, if I weren’t being so attentive of the AI’s behavior throughout my playthrough I definitely would have missed this.

This shows that while multiplayer might be more fun, playing the game solo offers certain experiences that can’t be had otherwise. I mean, if a buddy of mine were controlling Helena during this part, I wouldn’t have seen this happen and would have missed out on a bit of character development.

This game is just, there are so many things that really objectively don’t add any value to it but still exist and are executed flawlessly.

There are so few studios with this perspective on game crafting anymore, so few people willing to actually waste their time making something impressive regardless of whether or not it will sell the game. There’s a great GDC talk by the lead developer of the Prompto Photography AI System from Final Fantasy XV, the definition of a “Nice-To-Have” feature. In any other game it would have come out as minimally functional as possible, if it all, but for some reason someone allowed a whole team of people to work on literally nothing but the AI photographer for the entire duration of development. Why? Because to them, the game wasn’t just there to make money, people wanted to be proud of it, to make players feel a certain way. They didn’t just have the goal of making their money back, but they also wanted to make a piece of freaking art.

I sincerely think that if RE6 had been recognized as the action game it was and not just discredited for being a “bad Resident Evil game”, if the game had been successful and garnered positive or appropriate or fair reception, games today would be much different. If this game gained more popularity, I feel like game makers all around would have realized that players want an abundance of content, they want options, they want different game modes and co-operative choices. If this game had succeeded, a lot more games would look like FFXV and less like cheap excuses to get kids into gambling with loot boxes.

In the same way RE4’s success was a turning point in third-person shooter games, I feel like the failure of RE6 was also. Again, games are sociotechnical systems. Imagine being a manager at a game company and hearing about people complaining that this game called “Resident Evil 6” was too long. Why then allow your teams to invest any more than the minimal amount of effort? You don’t want your game to get panned right? I mean, maybe I’m extrapolating a little, maybe it wouldn’t have outright prevented us from seeing these changes in games, but I think a successful RE6 would have at least delayed the sorts of trends we see happening now.




Reinvention of the series

Now one thing we haven’t addressed is this: sure, maybe we accept that RE6 is not like the other RE games, but seeing as how people were so upset, is there, like, a reason it’s wrong to deviate when you’re a title in a long standing series?

Look, people like to pull out that whole “Resident Evil 6 is not a Resident Evil Game” as if it’s synonymous for “Resident Evil 6 is not a good game” or “Resident Evil 6 is a bad game”, but is it? Why can’t a game change genres just because it’s in a series? I mean, isn’t that like the whole draw to Final Fantasy? How every game takes place in a different world and the series jumps genres all the time? Also, isn’t it kind of garbage of anyone to complain about RE6 and expel it from recognition within its series for adding more action elements to what was established in RE4, when, like, that’s LITERALLY exactly what RE4 did?

That happened. Resident Evil 4 did this too, but everyone loved it. Why did it move away from preset camera angles and slow planar aiming? Because of the times. Why did RE6 make similar changes? Because of the times. Here’s a HOT TAKE for you. I LOVE RE4, if you don’t know to what extent, I invite you to watch my GenX video or just sort my youtube uploads by uploaded date ascending, and as much as I love it and it shaped my dang life, knowing the kid I was in 2012 and the types of games I was interested in then, I guarantee I would not have bought RE4 or a game exactly like it at that time.

2012, this was like hot pocket time for games like Call of Duty and Battlefield. BlackOps 2 came out a month after RE6, for reference. Back then if the back of a game box didn’t say online multiplayer, I wasn’t interested. Multiplayer games were booming, so blame them or don’t for trying to adapt Resident Evil into the sort of game people had interests in, for trying to make a game that wouldn’t NOT sell any copies. I choose not to blame them, because otherwise I’d be a 100% pure garbage man.

Listen, it’s like, lets say I came up to you and I was like “Hey, I’m gonna go out real quick and buy you a new car”, and then I left to return later with literally the best pizza on the planet earth. This is, like, a phenomenal pizza. I mean, sure, you didn’t get what I told you I was going to deliver, but you still have the actual pizza all other pizzas strive to be. THE BEST PIZZA EVER. Now here’s the thing about this example, you just need to remove one part to make it much easier to swallow. If instead of mentioning a car I just said “Hey, I’m gonna go get something, I’ll be right back” and then brought you the pizza, you wouldn’t be disappointed because you didn’t know what you were going to get but it turned out to be as good as it could have possibly been.

And you know what’s funny? Capcom never promised anyone a car. In fact, in the first minute of the game’s reveal trailer they start showing that whole hilariously unserious plane crash into china and proceed to show off the most action-focused and un-survival-horror-focused gameplay of all time. They didn’t just not promise a car, they explicitly mentioned the pizza! “Hello everyone, here is this pizza, get it if you want it”. If you went into the game expecting a Resident Evil like experience, you had nobody but yourself to blame. To expect something of it that the game’s first public appearances made abundantly obvious it would not be is wrong and dumb. If you did this, like me as a kid, you are a doodoo head, and if you blame them for it, then you are the aforementioned 100% pure garbage man.


And I haven’t played RE7 yet, my sister got it for me though, shout out to her, but as we can see the game did reinvent itself again and people seemed to be really pleased. Why did it do this? Well look at the times. The rising popularity of first-person single-player horror games meant that adapting the series to this genre now would likely make it successful. The fact that the genre had been dominated by independent games meant that anyone with a large corporate budget would likely stand out, so they started working on it. The public outlash after the reveal and cancellation of Konami’s new Silent Hill game and PT, the free playable teaser for it was validation for them, validation that there was interest in and a market for the new game they had been secretly working. People wanted something like this so desperately, the game barely even had to market itself. And can you blame them again for swip swapping genres? No, because all they’ve tried to do it suit player’s wants for the times.

RE4 was the best approach for its time, RE6 for its and RE7 for its.


Conclusion

Love me or hate me for this, but I’m being completely honest when I say that I think Resident Evil 6 is almost as good at what it’s trying to be as Resident Evil 4 was at what it was trying to be. And the only reason it’s not as good or greater isn’t because of any of its own unique features or ideas, but rather it’s from trying to even bother to preserve some design elements from the old games.


Here’s what I mean. In classic RE, inventory management was a crucial part of the game. You only had a limited amount of space which meant you’d often run out of ammo, sometimes you had to make difficult decisions about equipment brought into each chapter. In RE5 you only have 9 slots. If you want to bring a handgun, you’ll also need handgun ammo, you’re already using two slots. If you want to take 3 weapons with you, you’ll need 6 slots. That leaves you 3 left. If you want to keep the body armor on, that’s another 2 slots, so one left. If you hold health, good, but now you can’t really swap anything out. This worked because the game was survival horror, the best way to play was to go in just light enough to be able to pick up new items, but just heavy enough as to be able to handle combat without running dry. You’re always making tough decisions between prioritizing defense and offense. Do you drop a health item to instead hold a grenade? What do you do?

RE6 kind of mindlessly carries this sort of system over even though it’s not necessary in its genre. As I mentioned before, you almost always have enough ammo, often you have too much. Finding dropped items in the game isn’t a relief like in the previous ones, instead it’s a pain from the begining as you’ll basically always need to drop something just to pick something else up. At least they got items right, you can carry all of them at once which is really good for a multiplayer focused game like this. The struggle of holding so many freaking grenades though, it sucks. And the health items, why do I have to manage these? Just like in the other games, you can mix herbs, so sometimes you’re holding on to crappy single-use health items because you might later be able to convert it to a 6 use item. But you can also take the herbs you have and convert them into the snack that smiles back, tic-tacs and store them in this little thing, pop a few out when you want them. This clears out your inventory space of the health items, but only until you find more. Half the time you’re just waiting to complete an herb mixture so you can put your tic tacs away and it’s just a mess. The fact that they game has a dedicated command for automatically having a system mix and manage all of your herbs shows how much its new focus is wrestling with the old and outdated norms from the series it’s trying to preserve.

Another thing is the difficulty. Okay, before y’all pull a Hamish Black sucks at Splatoon mutiny on me, hear me out. RE traditionally had had really cool difficulty systems. In the older games, harder modes meant actually playing as different characters going through modified sequences with all sorts of changes. In RE1, playing hard mode made you play as Chris, changed enemy locations and event reduced your inventory size.

RE4 didn’t do this, instead it had a dynamic difficulty system which was really cool, but RE5 onwards when down your typical road of harder modes just giving your enemies harder defense and stronger offense. Basically they do more damage to you and you do less damage to them. RE6 does this, but like, really really poorly. A lot of enemies in the game have really really cheap moves that are barely telegraphed or predictable. Tie that to the fact that often you’ll be fighting hoards coming in from all different directions, half of them always out of site, most of the time it's super dark and you have no idea what’s happening, and you’re constantly taking hits that you just could not anticipate. They game’s health items are distributed very sparingly also, meaning that despite how much ammo you always seem to have, you never have enough tic tacs to last you long. You often need to rely on your partner to resuscitate you every time you go down. In single player it's fine because the partner can’t die and you can heal yourself immediately after, but in multiplayer you have the option to revive and heal your partner at the same time, and since the game doesn’t seem to give you much more health when you’re two people, it means you’re constantly struggling to make the same supply of medicine you had for one player mode last for two people.

It’s just like those old arcade games where enemies would show up with unpredictable behavior and the only way to win was through memorization and quarters. The difference here is that this games gives you checkpoints and wants you to progress, it doesn’t eat your quarters. So what happens sometimes on the normal difficulties is that you get into these slumps of having basically no health and no means to do anything about it but having tons of enemies ahead who still want a piece of you.

If you want my advice, play on normal difficulty, it’s definitely not that easy but it’s mostly fair. If you find yourself dying too much, especially if you’re playing it solo, you can always drop a level whenever you want. Playing with a friend, normal will work if you’re both committed and experienced, but if you really just want to have a good time with a buddy, easy mode isn’t a complete cake walk, you’ll still be taking hits you can’t anticipate and be running out of health, just at least when you take one of those hits you won’t lose half your health right away. It also is enough to prepare you for the mercenaries mode, it’s not like you’ll be a crap player for doing the game on easy.


RE6 also chooses to carry over a couple of puzzle sort of concepts from the previous games. Again, glad that they got the AI participating when in solo, but for the most part they’re bad. The only really good ones are those that don’t have both players doing the same exact thing separated by a wall but instead have the characters completely isolated from one another working out their own solutions to independent puzzles and influencing the other player’s progression.




Really, other than that there are only 2 issues I have with the game that stem from itself and itself alone, one which I don’t even wanna bring up but whatever.


So like, the game has a lot of cool action set pieces that require quick timing on the parts of both players. Problem is that some of them aren’t really optimized for online play, especially when your partner has crappy internet and the game has been out for 4-5 years. The chase sequences were really really bad, and if you came for the steam your know that like a significant amount of it became us just trying to get passed this one section where you’re running up this thing while a jelly skeleton monster chases you. For some reason the game took too long to sync our actions together, so our characters would just sit there unresponsive even after we both pressed jump, and then of course the monster would break the platform beneath us and kill us. To finally complete it we ended up figuring out that purposely delaying our jumps somehow made it sync up faster, so we had to wait before issuing commands. It was really weird, but I can say from experience that I didn’t have this problem before, so truth be told it could just have been a combination of my partner’s internet connection issues which plagued a lot of the stream or just a winding down of network support for the game.

Secondly, and this is kind of a big one, but the game is really bad at giving you directions. There’s a UI related word I’ve used a couple of times, affordance, and this game has almost none. Affordance is how an interface directs a users on how to use it through its design alone. The classic example is that of a button. If you’ve never seen a button before, how do you know how to use it? Do you push it or do you twist it? Well, the fact that its raised makes you intuitively understand that you interact with it by pushing.

In games affordance is important is important if you’re trying to preserve a state of flow, you can program people’s minds to automatically respond to certain environment cues that keep them going the way you want them to. If you haven’t already, check out Mark Brown’s video, “Why Nathan Drake Doesn’t Need a Compass” (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k70_jvVOcG0) where he explains how NaughtyDog uses composition to indicate to a player how to interact with their environment as a way of guiding them without waypoints. Games like Uncharted and Assassin’s creed use the color of game objects to indicate how they’re used and what they’ll do. In RE4, I would argue that doors served this purpose. No entrance or exit to any room in the game looks the same, you can tell when you’re facing a direction if you’re retreading old ground or progressing forward. RE5 is mostly the same, the pathways in the environment naturally guide you to your destination, environments are unique enough for you to know, without needing to peek at a map, where you’re going. In fact, RE5 was so good at this that instead of having a dedicated button to show a player where they’re objective is, it instead had one that locked the camera on the position of your partner as that was more important information to give a player access to.

In this game, I don’t know what it is about it, but you’re constantly losing your coordinates and forgetting where you are. The environments, as detailed as they are, are often very cryptic about which paths are valid and which aren’t. Elements repeat themselves a lot, many rooms look the same. To guide players, a dedicated button exists for pulling up a phone which points to a guidance point. Once you reach that point, the game will load the next one for you to follow. Once you discover this, you start relying on it all of the time, even in situations where the game might actually be guiding you properly. It’s just really crappy that the game had to be littered with so many beacons so that players wouldn’t get lost. I mean, there’s this one section in Leon’s thing where you need to find 3 keys for a door, and the guidance beacon just waits for you there until you have all of the keys. Getting to the keys is a huge pain in the butt and you’ll be running around in circles for a while before your realize it. Chris’ also has a moment like this in a tanker ship which is just as bad. You’re navigating this maze-like environment and it takes way too long to discover new paths.


RE4 included a scene very similar to this in Salazar’s garden but gave the player so many cues as to where to go. Each corner of the maze looked unique, there were natural landmarks like fountains that you could use to direct yourself, there were torches that you could decide to extinguish to mark places you’d already been, chest that you could leave open to show that you’d been there, enemy mutant dogs hiding and growling in the bushes of corners you hadn’t yet visited. The game basically afforded you the solution to the maze without you realizing it, it was easy to tell when you were somewhere new, there was always some sort of hint when selecting a branching path.

It’s disappointing that RE6 couldn’t do better at this. Though to be fair most action games I’ve played have relied on camera positioning for direction and most fps games have radars and waypoints, so maybe the game’s true flaw was structuring itself along a linear path, I don’t know.



But other than having to consult a lightsaber from time to time to tell you where you have to go, the game executes most of what it’s trying to do flawlessly. It’s a really really good action game, where it doesn’t fail its series is in its environments which all seem to pay homage to familiar locations from the previous games, adapted of course to this new genre. It tries its best to redefine its series in the time it was made, and I think it did great. It was exactly the sort of game people wanted then, the problem is that the people who bought it weren’t the people who wanted it. It had, before its release, an established audience of people who misunderstood it and would reject it. Give this to a kid who’d played RE4, they’d be disappointed. Give it to a dude who’d played Call of Duty though and they’d be pleasantly surprised.

Games, hello, are sociotechnical systems, and so when they fail you can’t just look at their technical characteristics, you also must consider their social aspects. RE6 did not fail for any functional reasons having to do with itself. If a game exactly like RE6 had been released under a different name and brand, it would have been a success. RE6 failed for social reasons. Resident Evil 6 is an downright awesome, inspiring, polished and complete game, and it failed due to social impacts that it tried to mitigate from day 1, which hopefully by this point, you agree with me that it didn’t deserve.


The game is a really good pizza, one of the best I think I’ve ever had. Of course, if you’re going in thinking about a car, yeah, it’s gonna be a disappointment. Not bad, just a disappointment. You can’t drive a pizza after all.

And before shutting this show down, I’m gonna pass the video to CoolPants, the Piers to my Chris, the dude who stepped up over his holiday break to complete this game with me. I’ll give him a few minutes to say literally whatever he wants a probably counter everything I’ve just said in this video, so Jimmy, the stage is yours!



Hi, so as some of you may already know, I live in Montreal Quebec, Canada. Really great city, anyone who’s ever lived here or visited here will tell you that, but one of the crappy parts of it is that we only have one theme park closeby, called Laronde, and it’s kind of trash. Much like everything in this city, it was built waaay back for the Expo 67, but now it’s owned by 6 Flags.

So if you’ve ever been to a six flags, it’s basically that, but french I guess.

It has a really rocky history though, and that’s why I said it’s trash. Listen to this. So this building which was built before the park and is now in the park, back in the day it was part of an aquarium that, among other things, housed a group of performing dolphins.

So as the story goes in the 80’s there’s a big strike and included in the picket lines are, you guessed it, the dolphins. No I’m kidding, but I bet they wish they could’a been there because they’ve been closer to the half a dozen trainers responsible for feeding them. So you can probably tell where this story is headed, but with the strike lasting over a month, by the time the trainers returned, the dolphins had just, wasted away. Now, that’s the dramatic version of the story people like to tell for added shock and awe, the real version involves other feeders trying to help but the dolphins not biting since they only trusted their trainers and the fact that one of the performing dolphins indeed did survive, but a conclusion involving one pregnant dolphin dead at the bottom of the pool and two dying shortly after the return of staff, in my opinion that’s dramatic and shocking enough.

And this building, despite 3 plus 1 unborn dolphins dying in it, still stands. You can now go there and play videogames, because it’s called the nintendo zone, or at least it used to be, truth be told I haven’t been there in years. They have, like, special events there, I remember being at the park when the WiiU had just come out, and I played, like 30 seconds of that zelda game.

Like, I don’t know, I feel like if I were in charge I wouldn’t have built my amusement park around a piece of infrastructure home to dolphin ghosts. Like, to be real, since hearing that story I don’t think I’ve been back to the park, not because of it, just, out of coincidence, I guess I’m going nowhere with this thought.






Now, from one awful tragedy to something significantly less important, the subject of today’s video and one of the other reasons I feel like laronde is a bit trashy, facilitations of theft!

So picture this, you go to an amusement park you get your phone stolen OUF! Could you have done something about it? Yeah, chase the dude! Oh wait, you were in a rollercoaster, whoopsie.


So if you’ve ever been to a theme park and have ever had anxiety, you’ve probably had anxiety at a theme park, and it was probably because you were worried you were gonna get your stuff stolen.


Now, TO BE CLEAR! I haven’t been to LaRonde in years and I don’t know whether or not they’ve solved the issue already, but the fact of the matter is that EVEN if they solved is as soon as the day after my last visit, I think it was too late, that’s my opinion.

So at LaRonde and assumably many places like it, the way it works is that you show up to a ride, the train labeled A shows up, you pass through the gate, drop your stuff in a doorless wooden cubby, get on the train, it goes, then while you’re gone a train labeled B returns to the station full of a bunch of people who just finished their ride, they get out, presumably collect their belongings that they had put in the cubby before you, and then they leave. Then more people get on that train, they do the whole thing, whatever, your train returns, you get out, go to the cubby and collect your stuff that the people who just left and already have a 3-7 minute lead on you presumably DID NOT steal.

And there’s the problem. When you drop your stuff off in one of those dusty splinter boxes, which often you do because you’re probably packing a ton of stuff in a backpack because it’s hot and can’t hold sunscreen in your pocket, and you also don’t want your phone falling out of your pocket on the ride like YOU KNOW will happen, and you also don’t want it to break when some dude comes up and pushes a metal bar so hard into your waist and crunches the contents of your pockets, well, you’re basically taking a gamble with no security. You don’t know what the people in front of you are gonna do, the park takes no responsibility for lost or stolen items, the people working the rides are highschool kids who 1) can’t watch your stuff because they process queues of hundreds of people a day, 2) wouldn’t watch your stuff even if you asked because they’re doofy highschool kids, and 3) get paid so little they’d be better off stealing your phone themselves if none of the other park goers do.






So what’s the solution? Do what Paramount, sorry, Canada’s Wonderland does. Christ, that park used to be so cool. It used to be called Paramount (subtitle) Canada’s Wonderland and the gimmick was that the whole park was film themed. A few years ago when I went to niagra falls and realized there was nothing to do in niagra falls and ended up taking a day trip out to toronto to see the park again, turned out paramount, despite building, like, the paramount freaking mountain in the middle of the park, they backed out. All the rides are the same, but now, like, the Top Gun ride is just “Cool Fighter Jets Ride”, same with the rest of them. The kids section used to be all Nickelodeon themed, but now it’s all, like, snoopy themed, so like the old jimmy neutron ride is now pumpkins, and it’s pretty clear they were originally eggs, it’s so goofy.




But anyways, when I went there a few years ago, I was blown away by the simplicity of this solution they had to the issue of theme parks facilitating theft, and the solution was a set of locked boxes. Again, for all I know, LaRonde already does this, but whatever, it’s too late my dudes.

So what they do at Paramount, whatever, I’m just gonna call it that, but what they do there is for each simultaneous set of set of operating trains they have at once, the operator has, right next to them, a box. So say there are two trains, A and B, the operator has two wooden boxes, labeled A and B. As you go towards train A, the operator opens box A for you, you put your stuff in and they lock it. Then you go, enjoy your ride without your phone and without stress, meanwhile train B returns. The operator unlocks box B which was locked and contained their belongings, the collect only their stuff, the operator lets on new people and locks their stuff in box B, and then finally once you return, the operator unlocks box A for you, you take your stuff, and onto the next ride.

The solution is perfect because ensures that only the people allowed can view and modify the contents of a box at a time, and forcing the operator to manage the locking and unlocking of boxes that are right in front of them the whole tie means that their eyes will catch anyone even if they tried to do anything sneaky.

Look, we live in a world where you can’t trust anyone, everyone out there, they’re out to fucking kill you. I mean, even me, if you were here right now, if it was just me and you I swear to god I’d beat you to a fucking pulp you godamn mothefucking prick. So it’s good that Paramount locks people’s stuff in such a way that they can have some peace of mind as they ride the italian job, oh sorry, Backlot stunt coaster.


Okay wait, so I’m watching the video on their site of the ride, right? And this is noooot actually how it goes. So the ride, as you could guess, was once based on the remake of the Italian Job, and at this part here the cars would actually come to a complete halt, and this helicopter here wasn’t visible, but instead it got raised up from the background by some sort of mechanical arm I guess, and these cans around here were all on fire. And then a clip of audio from the movie would play and there would be a big explosion of ACTUAL flames come out from one of the cans like it just got blown up, and then you’d continue. Now I guess since they lost the rights for all the movie themes, they had to cut that, and that’s what this video clip of the ride seems to suggest, but when I rode it just a year and a half ago, the ride actually came to a complete stop here like it used to, and it just waited for the entire duration of the old set-piece, expect nothing was happening, no audio, no fire, no cool helicopter flying up, nothing, and I just laughed like mad. So this, this is false, or maybe I’m remembering it wrong, but I also know that they removed all the decals from the cars when I went, so they looked like bars of soap in the shape of cars, so I don’t know, maybe I am right.


So moral of the story, tit for tat, a bad boi slaps you up, beat his lil bum bum. Put you belongings in locked boxes to keep them safe from criminals, and also, if even a single dolphin dies in a building, just take it down, rebuild, don’t put a dozen WiiUs in there, that’s just, ugh, that makes me feel weird.


Also, PSA, this might be interesting to you, but when I was in Niagra I also visited Marine Land. Now I know there’s a lot of controversy surrounding these sorts of parks, seaworld included, but like, actually going there, it really wasn’t what I expected. Now I can’t say the same for sea world, but marine land felt less like an attraction and more like walking into a nature reserve, or like, the lab of a marine biologist.

I mean, first of all, you walk in and it’s just like a giant forest, and you just walk through it. There’s nothing to see or do but, like, breathe and walk. There’s like 3 rides in the whole park and they’re all pretty close, the rest of it is woods and a couple of animal habitats. There’s this giant open field with just, like, maybe a hundred deer, just, like running all around, and there’s this tiny fence you can see them through. Then there, like, waaaay at an opposite end, this enormous bear habitat, like, easily 30-40 bears there and they’re just like, doing their thing, you can feed them snacks if you want. And like, when you hit the big ones, any of the whale tanks, you walk in and there’s signs all over telling you to be quiet, this is a working environment, and right in the middle there’s a desk with straight up a scientist just sitting there writing notes and working, and she has like a whole scuba gear set up and she’s ready to jump into the water a moment’s notice, and then outside there’s a sign with a schedule like when the brush the whales, when they do checkups, when they have playtime, but, like, the whole park feels like less of a zoo than it is a window into a work environment that involves animals. Like straight up there’s a person here just monitoring a beluga calf all day and you’ve gotta shut up and let her do her job my dude.

I mean, the show you go to see at the end, the amount it’ll bother you afterwards is a function of how impressive it is that the trainers are able to train these animals. It’s weird that some are just there for entertainment, not because they’re endangered and pregnant and this park has the facilities and staff to keep them safe, but I mean, it was weird. From the ads that play on tv all the time, it was nothing like I expected. I mean, the ticket was cheap and it made for a good walk for a few hours, and hey, if even a dollar of what I paid went towards the salary of the people in charge of the wellbeing of pregnant and baby water mammals, the people who nurse these whales when, like, their parents don’t because mother nature is weird and cruel, I think I’m mostly cool with that.

But also having read the wikipedia page’s summary of controversy surrounding the park, I don’t know how I feel about saying any of this anymore.

I mean, look, to me, it didn’t feel like you could come out of there without a greater appreciation of nature and ocean life. Going to marine land and seeing a certain side of it is the sort of experience that kind of makes you want to protest the other side of marine land, if you get what I’m saying.


Well, that was fun, ummmm.
Anyways, that’s all.






In case you couldn’t tell, this whole video is basically a test of this new microphone...


Depth of the Wild

Hi, once again I’m coming to you from this unordinary spot. Hmmm, probably a reason for that.

So, last time we spoke it was on the subject of the latest Zelda game, Breath of the Wild, or as I fittingly put it along with multiple decibels, The Legend of Zelda, Breadth of the Wild. Sorry about that, the most feedback I got on that whole video was about how annoyed people got when I jokingly upped the volume at that part. I swear I’ll never do that again. Ha, ha, ha. (this part was loud)

But it’s that lack of feedback that’s brought us together again today. You see, something I thought was expressed pretty clearly in the introduction of that video didn’t seem to get picked up properly. The fault’s probably on me, I should have been a little more explicit about what I was trying to say, but hey that’s what today is for.

As you can tell from the title of this video, we’re going to be talking about the word depth for a bit. Now, we will talk about about the concept of depth across various domains, but you heard me right, we’re actually going to talk about the word itself today.

So, depth is a 5 letter word and is commonly found in the D-section of a dictionary. Quick trivia here, the D-section also houses the word Definition, which is craaaaazy to think about. I mean, they had to go through all of the A, B and C-words before they even defined what they were actively doing. That’s mighty bananas.

So let’s get caught up on the definition of definition, for those who don’t know. Let’s see the Oxford dictionary: https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/definition


And you know what, just for good measure let’s check my FunkAndWagnall’s

Ah, perfect. So the idea of the definition being exact, of it distinguishing its subject from all other things, that’s the key I want you to hold on to.

Now, if you’ve ever taken a specialized writing course, you might be familiar with something called a Technical Definition. This is a definition style or format used when describing technical concepts or objects in a way that can be understood without any required held knowledge. There are some crappy rules involved in them, like, you can’t use a words composing words within the technical definition, so for example in defining a corkscrew, you’d neither be allowed to use the words cork or screw, you’d have to describe them within the definition itself. It’s also common practice to begin by stating the domain in which the word is being defined, so for example, “In area of kitchen tools, a corkscrew is yada yada yada”, or “In the field of aerobatic maneuvers, a corkscrew is a bing bang boom”, you know? Alternatively, if you wish to or are left with no other choice, you can keep other complex and technical terms and concepts in the description as long as you also provide their referenced technical definitions either before or after. It’s kind of the same idea as a wikipedia article, every word that isn’t guaranteed to be familiar to the reader has its own definition or article referenced.

Now, the way it was taught in my courses was that there’s really a single important goal that a technical definition must fulfill. I thought I’d have to give the same argument I was given, but speaking of wikipedia, the page on technical definitions includes exactly what I was hoping it would.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_definition
“A technical definition is a definition in technical communication describing or explaining technical terminology. Technical definitions are used to introduce the vocabulary which makes communication in a particular field succinct and unambiguous.”

So Wikipedia my boi, what are technical definitions used for? Ah, they’re used to introduce the vocabulary which makes communication in a particular field succinct and unambiguous.

Ambiguity is the nemesis of definition and order, it is the reason, for example, most large scale projects include glossaries. Yes, if ever you find yourself working on a large information based project, you shouldn’t be surprised to find a glossary attached. The last thing you want is a team where every member calls the same thing by a different name in their communications, especially when you’re dealing with international teams. Setting up at the earliest point clear and strict naming and definition conventions is a necessity when it comes to basically anything that wants to take itself seriously.


Back to last video

So in the last video, though I didn’t say it explicitly, what I was trying to imply was that the definition of depth commonly used by those in games writing was bad due to, ding ding ding, ambiguity. I mentioned the fact that in using concepts from graph theory, words such as depth and breadth already have definitions.

Let’s take a look for a minute at some definitions of depth specifically in the field of games that people have produced. Should out to Chris aka CritPoints for sharing a ton of glossaries with me a while back. Should point out he does not agree with what I’m trying to say here, but he pointed me in the right direction for some stuff I was looking for. I should also point out that his glossary’s definition of depth is very different from mine which I’ll provide more formally later, but is still a thing. I’d just label it with a different word, but we’ll get into that in a bit.

http://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/LewisPulsipher/20111219/90810/What_is_Depth_in_Games.php
http://www.whatgamesare.com/depth.html
http://critical-gaming.com/critical-glossary/


So this definition of depth comes from critical-gaming.com’s critical glossary of game terms. Actually what’s of interest to us is the “Gameplay depth” part, can’t really complain about the definition of depth because yes, artistic works do have their own definition of depth, this is true. But here’s what’s written:

depth
Depth is the meaning of a work. Meaning is derived from the complexities of a work. This meaning comes in the form of concepts, experiences, and emotions. Like sophisticated arguments, depth/meaning is built up on smaller parts that support and resonate with each other.
Gameplay depth/meaning mainly revolves around interplay. Because games are interactive systems with goals or goal like objectives, every action and situation can be evaluated according to how well it achieves victory. In other words, the meaning of gameplay comes from goal seeking interactivity. 

Now we’re gonna play the role of a teacher grading this definition. In the last video I said to look out for certain graph and network related words in people’s definitions of depth in games. Here our eyes should catch Interplay, Interactive systems and Interactivity. These sorts of words, like we said, imply relationships between parts of a system, interactions between features, “because games are interactive systems”, they are sets of some features that interact with some other features, they are a class diagram, they are a domain model. Features are nodes, possible interactions are edges. We have nodes and links, we have a graph. Huh.

So here’s the source of the ambiguity. Full-disclosure, you might disagree with me on whether or not this is actually ambiguous, though in a funny way that would actually reinforce the ambiguity argument. The fact that at least two people can disagree proves that it's ambiguous. If everyone agreed with me, well I guess there wouldn’t be any uncertainty. Though I guess that’s kind of paradoxical, hmmm, maybe I’m wrong, baaaaaah.

So, the definition provided uses other technical terms, terms that imply the logic of my favorite theory, graph theory being included. Problem: graph theory already has an unambiguously established definition of depth. So, the question: can you use concepts from a knowledge set to redefine words already defined within that logic set? Here’s where I’m throwing a little opinion in here, no, I think that’s illegal. You might not think so, but you have to at least admit that it’s shady and not good practice. This is at least something definition smell, you know a logical pattern that’s recognized as bad, maybe not illegal, but at least bad.

So why do I think it's illegal? Well, because while it might technically work in a definition like english, some languages actually prevent you from defining things like this, programming languages specifically. Now before you go off hollering me saying “lol programming languages aren’t real languages”, hold up, consider for a second that there’s a reason they’re called “languages” and not just something like “command syntaxes”. There are semantics involved here, programs are just representations of logical concepts after all, they’re often just 2 steps of abstraction away from natural language descriptions of problems, so I think the comparison is just.

I really hope this example doesn’t go over too many people’s heads, but like, structuring a definitions like this is like importing a library into your project and then redefining one of its classes or methods without inheritance or an override. Like, it’s not like the definition acknowledges the existence of another definition of depth within itself, it just kind of tried to hijack it inappropriately. You know what would happen if you tried to compile a program with this structure? It would fail. That’s a reference issue, it’s a dependency problem. You can structure a definition to be dependent upon another definition that itself defines the word. Unfortunately, english doesn’t need to compile properly before being executed, that’s why stuff like this can exist.

Maybe a more approachable example is the wikipedia one. Say this definition of depth had a wikipedia page. The word interactivity would probably have its own page, and following that link would eventually lead you to a page on networks and graph theory. This page would then link to a page on depth, but rather than being the source depth page about games, it would be the graph theory definition of depth. That’s, that’s no good. You see how that’s a problem, right?

As a result of this inappropriate dependency structure, this definition of depth, by the definition of definition, is ambiguous. Does it mean that it's meaningless? Absolutely not. A quick way to instantly eliminate the ambiguity would be to simply change the word, call it something else, call it what it actually is.

Depth already has a meaning, the same one, in networks, in software, and in mechanical and logical interactions within games. This, this is not depth, this is something else. You’re talking about interplay, multiplication? That’s probably multiplicative complexity. It’s not depth, please stop inappropriately using that word.


Unambiguous game specific definition

Now, the other thing about the word depth in games is how many other definitions people seem to have for it. A lot of people call a lot of different things depth. For example, one common one you might have heard goes something like, “aight so you’ve got the super skilled and knowledgeable players up here right? And you’ve got the crap noob players down here ya nay? Well this distance, that’s depth”. Now, sometimes this definition includes something about the depth of the interactions known-to or available-to more experienced players being greater than that of the new players, and you know what? That absolutely makes sense.

The idea is that the better you are, the deeper the strategies or interactive actions you’re able to execute. Now I don’t necessarily have an issue with this definition because in its two forms, the first being the one where the graph definition of depth is not included and the second being where it is, it’s either a game-specific description of the word which is safe, or its not inconsistent with the actual graphical depth. I mean think about it, if a noob player is someone who knows only surface-level interactions and a veteran is a player who can reach interactions at the maximum depth level, then this distance is just the maximum depth level, which is just depth.

So that’s completely fine.

What you’ve gotta do is learn to spot the difference between re-definition and definition extension or augmentation. Here (good def) we’re talking about interactivity moving forward, we’re talking actual depth, it’s just been properly described within the context of a game. Yeah, the skill gap between the most skilled player and the least skilled player is a function of a game’s graphical depth, all’s good. We’re extending the graphical definition here, we’re not contradicting it. We’re using, or in structural terms, inheriting it and expanding upon it within the domain we want. This is 100% legal and serves to reduce ambiguity.

But here (bad def) we’re talking about the total interactivity between all features, the set of all edges in a graph somehow being depth. We’re taking a piece of our foundation and trying to override its meaning and function with what is actually just complexity, n(n-1). This is not depth, it has more to do with breadth.

That’s what I was trying to say in the last video.

People use the word depth a lot and they mostly use it inappropriately. When the bring up graphical concepts in their explanation, there is actually always a better word to use than depth. So what I’m saying is, why not use another more appropriate term? Why inject this ambiguity into your works and into the minds of your audiences. Depth is a thing that already exists, leave it alone. Stop ripping the page out of the FunkAndWagnals and try to come up with the ACTUAL term for what you’re trying to describe which is arguably not depth.


Response to Common Criticism

So yeah, I’m this tilted over the misuse of a single word.

Now, the criticism I’ve already received and frankly am expecting to hear more of is the following.
What I’m talking about here, the classical definition that I associate with depth isn’t the popularly supported one. Most people use the complexity-based one instead when talking about games, and because of this the word is essentially given this meaning instead. Basically, everyone says depth is this so depth is this.

While that may be true, I simply don’t care. I’m not concerned with what most people are saying, I don’t care about popularity. My concern when it comes to this is correctness.  Just because a lot of people say or think a certain thing, doesn’t mean they’re right. I think I’ve done a pretty decent job explaining how the word is currently being used incorrectly in a way that fosters ambiguity up to this point. If you really really care about criticizing anything here today, that’s the angle you’ll have to come at it from, though I don’t know if it's possible to argue that its unambiguous given the evidence. I mean, it’s not like I was throwing opinion around here, I showed specifically why it’s ambiguous. That wasn’t my opinion, that was kind of more like a proof. If you’re fine accepting the popular meaning of depth, that’s up to you, but just know that has no impact on what I’m saying about its correctness.


My Definitions:

Alright, so, my goal today is to provide you with my technical, maybe not definitions, but formal explanations of Depth and Breadth. First though, as these definitions will reference them, I need to give you my descriptions of Complexity and Gameplay. All of this will be founded in informatics and software engineering stuff, so calm your jets. Like, I’m not making up stuff here, this stuff comes from real places, well, aside from what I’m gonna call gameplay.


Complexity:
So, Complexity, as we touched on in the last video, is the total interactions possible within a system. So, features are nodes, interactions are edges. Algorithmic time and space complexities are always measured in terms of the worst-case, the most complex case. The notation for this is called BigO. The complexity of a system can be seen as the complexity of an algorithm that is able to do a complete integration testing run, that’s to say it's able to traverse every edge and observe the interactions between every set of nodes or features. In the worst case all nodes are attached to each other and to themselves, so the BigO complexity of a fully connected system is n^2 where n is the number of nodes. Say e is the number of edges and e = n^2, e is our system’s complexity. 

Pretty boring stuff right? Well yeah, that’s because this definition is independent of the field of games.

Gameplay:
Gameplay however is not. Here’s where we get into the game stuff, I’m still gonna keep it grounded in software though, and honestly you could use this same definition for something you could call maybe “valuable complexity”.

So games and other software, in that worst case, have a complexity of n^2. Of that complexity though, not everything offers immediate value to players or users. Now, in Agile, which is a project process, you have this concept of user stories, I believe I’ve explained this in a previous video. These are short stories about interactions between the system and some class of actor and they’re always formatted the same way. “As a user, I am able to upload a video to youtube”, “As a player I am able to swing a sword”. These stories are not atomic, they can absolutely be broken down into the smaller tasks that make them up. In Agile methodologies though, only actual user stories are allowed to have their complexity estimated, which is maybe a problem in some cases but sometimes works. The idea is that only stories that add value to a user matter. Things like “As a user I can click the upload button” or “as a player I can press the weapon button on the controller”, those don’t really matter, they’re not stories, they’re hardware or platform specific. User stories are a little bit more abstract, they’re things that can be done, they don’t include how those things are done.

So, “as a player, I’m able to perceive visuals” or “as the system, I’m able to render visuals to the screen”, those aren’t user stories. They make up part of the complexity, sure, I mean every feature of the game needs to be tied to some sort of graphics super node, but this doesn’t bring immediate value to the user.

So what I say gameplay is is the sub-graph of the full-complexity graph of a system that is a part of at least one actual user-story. “As a player I can throw my boomerang”, any node or edge related to that story remains, “As a user I can use my special ability”, that stays too.

In other words, gameplay is the subset of complexity that has to do with actual valuable aspects of the game, things that are platform, hardware and software independent. Gameplay is a subgraph that represents the essence of the game, not the class diagram but rather one level of abstraction higher, the domain diagram. The complexity of this graph, the total number of interactions possible within the gameplay logic is the scope or scale of the gameplay. Still n^2 in the worst case.

This is of course a description of the noun, gameplay. Not to be confused with the act of gameplay. Like, a game’s gameplay is this, but gameplay is also the act of playing a game. I think that goes without saying but I’m just covering my bum here at this point.

Also, just thought I should point out that this concept of gameplay is actually what some people refer to as depth.

https://critpoints.wordpress.com/2016/05/01/critpoints-glossary/#depth

Chris’ pretty popular definition of depth for example is consistent with what I’m calling gameplay.

He says:
Depth is the number of non-redundant game states that are relevant to a player or group of players. Depth is the effective complexity of a game, the measure of complexity that actually makes a difference relative to players.
Since pure complexity is not a good judge of a game’s quality alone, depth exists as a term to find how complex a game is relative to the players.
[...] The aim of game design is in part to emphasize and make relevant as many states as possible, while having them remain distinct from one another. This is the conversion of complexity into depth.

This is extremely well written and described, just replace every instance of “depth” with “gameplay” and I’m right behind it. My issue, again, is that depth isn’t the right word for this. Forget about it already having a definition, but depth doesn’t carry with it any notion of interaction. Gameplay obviously does. Like, “pure complexity is not a good judge of a game’s quality alone, depth exists as a term to find how complex a game is relative to the players”. First of all, I don’t think depth has anything to do with quality, but what I’m trying to say here is wouldn’t “gameplay” be such a more appropriate word to insert here? Like, in the same way user-stories are non-redundant and non-trivial subsets of complexity that offer actual value to users in all other software, can’t we say gameplay instead is the non-redundant subset of complexity of a game’s system that offers value to players.

Like, in traditional software, if you replaced user-stories with depth, you’d be wrong. The game equivalent of user-story though is gameplay, gameplay interaction, something like that. Gameplay has its own depth, yes, but its not just depth.

It's really just terminology we have a problem with here. Hey, if Chris is allowed to famously have an issue with the use of the word immersion, I think I’m allowed to get triggered over depth. Depth is to me what immersion is to Chris I guess.

You know what, you know what I’m gonna do? I’m not even gonna tell him when this video comes out. I’m gonna do like what he does when he references people without telling them and then months later they discover him discussing them on his blog. I mean, I guess that’s the way he would want to be cited, do unto others as you would have done to you hahaha. I’m going to refer to his glossary in the description, but yo super sneak nobody tell him about, I wanna goof on him and have him see this waaaay later hahaha.

At least I’m not actually arguing though, like, we’re both talking about the same thing, he’s really into what he calls depth, I’m really into what I call gameplay, we’re into the same thing. Aye at least he doesn’t have freaking spongebob on his back eh? That’s gotta be nice.


So depth and breadth? Definitions for those? HAHA I tricked you! I gave them already in the last video hahahaha! With regards to games though, I’d say that “gameplay depth” is straight up the depth of the gameplay. If you understand what gameplay is and you understand what depth is, you get it. Same goes for breadth.



What I feel is important about preserving the graphical uses of depth and breadth though is that you can use them to break down specific parts of a game’s structure, which is what I’m finally gonna do with Zelda for a bit before shutting down this party!


Zelda Ending

Let me preface this by saying I did complete BotW recently. Oh, spoiler warning, I got hollered for that recently actually, so I’m gonna be more careful now, but if you watched my FFXV video in which I described popular ending techniques in open world games, then you’ll be familiar with the weak ending type that has kind of plagued zelda for a while. I mean, I know it doesn’t bother a lot of people, but it bugs me. It kind of harms the player’s immersion and suspension of disbelief for the rest of the game. I mean, it did literally exactly what I said was bad in that video. Like, you beat the game, the ending is kind of lack-luster, no serious impact on the word of the game, you get this long celebratory cut-scene, yada yada, the game takes you back to the title screen, you continue your save and you’re literally right in front of the door to the final boss. OOooooh see ya latter gannonerino! I actually, uh, I forgot to got get some more seeds and find a new horse. I’ll catch ya later zeldo. I mean, it was the worst. Straight up just facing the end of the castle and just doing a 180 and bouncing. It was so wimpy. I was really hoping they wouldn’t do that. Frick dude. Like, the ending itself was cool, I liked the victory-lap sort of thing they let you do with the super ganon, but reloading that save and being forced to walk all the way out of the castle, having it stay there, always visible in the distance for the rest of your gameplay experience, that kills it dude. That’s so freaking lame.


Progression (and story)

First let's talk about progression though. Your progression through both the story and game is completely non-linear and is the perfect example on breadth-first-design, yeah, that’s what I’m gonna call it.

See, like, if you just model the game’s progression events and states as a graph, you can see that it’s basically all breadth. From the root, the only thing you’re forced to do is the introductory phase which serves as a tutorial. After that, literally everything the game has to offer is opened up to you immediately. Including only events relevant to reaching the end of the game, you can either, well, immediately enter the castle and fight ganon, the goal state you’re looking for a path toward, or you can go complete any of the 4 divine beast dungeons if you want. Nothing else really impacts the ending, I mean not even getting the master sword has any direct effect on the progression of the game. You don’t need it, and if you decide to get it, you can get it whenever.

What’s really cool though is that exploring any of these states, completing any of these beasts doesn’t change the progression of the game. If you choose to do a divine beast, the next depth level expanding from that node will simply include all of the nodes from the breadth of the parent node minus itself. If you do the water temple, everything is left but the water temple.

This is completely contrary to how zelda has been handling progression for a very long time in these more linear and deep set ups. Linear progression is depth. You must first do the intro, then the first temple, then the second temple, so on and so forth until the end. Despite being in a pseudo open-world, past zeldas main progression tasks have always been a deep predetermined ordered set of events.

As you can see directly in the graphs, old zelda progression might be deeper, but botw’s breadth-focused progression offers not just a single path to the goal state, but many. There are various combinations in which you can either complete or not complete quests that will have you visiting states that have an impact on that final boss battle.

This, I would argue, is one of the game’s strongest assets. By providing many completion paths, the game has much more replayability. I mean, think about it. What’s the point of replaying Twilight Princess? There isn’t, it’s just gonna be the same thing all over again. I know I complained about the ending sucking, that running out of the castle for the post-game kind of sucks, but you know, I think it's forgivable because of this. I don’t think the point of beating botw is to continue afterwards, I think the point is to restart eventually and try to play the whole game completely differently. That’s what I personally like about the game’s ending, the very open-ended progression. I think that the value of this sort of replayability is much much greater than that of the actual ending. It’s really cool.

See that right there, that’s why I like using the graph stuff. Without being able to use words like depth and breadth, you can’t discuss or model stuff formally like this.

Divine Beasts

Very breadthy, compare to Mark Brown’s diagrams. Whole game is breadth, from picking divine beasts to doing other stuff. No real depth. Can do anything whenever.

Now, I also wanted to talk about the dungeons, the divine beasts themselves. So, hopefully you watch Mark Brown from GameMaker’s toolkit. Fun fact he’s actually Hamish Black’s evil twin brother. Anyways, he has this series called Boss Keys where he explores the design of the dungeons in the zelda series across all of the titles. He made up this diagramming system to present progression in them. It’s a pretty neat tool, he uses it to show how some dungeons offer many solutions whereas others always include a single critical path. Now, he hasn’t reached BotW yet, and that video might be out before this one, but going off of his previous graphs, I can already kind of tell what his images will look like in that video and what he’ll probably have to say about them.

Very similar to the progression of the story, each dungeon first forces you to reach an important control panel, then opens up and asks you to access 5 terminals. Unlike the optional dungeons in the main quest’s progression, these terminals are not optional, you need to get them all in order to complete it, though the order doesn’t matter. So what’s crazy is that you walk into this dungeon, right, in, like, old zeldas. You go in and there’s just one main path to follow. You always get enough keys for the doors you need and overall it’s a pretty easy time. Here, instead you have 5 isolated puzzles to solve independently of each other. There aren’t any locked doors, there’s no point at which one terminal needs to be activated before another. You can do whichever you want whenever you want.

[Send virtual kisses to Myles at this point]

The move towards non-linearity, towards breadth clearly affected the design of the dungeons. In previous games, each room kind of housed its own puzzles. From time to time certain rooms would contain some sort of control that could affect other rooms, for example the water temple in twilight princess whose central staircase can be used to guide the flow of water and also open new paths for the player to explore. Still, most puzzles existed as a means of progression. You must get through this room to get to the next, you must figure out and complete the challenge in this room to do it.

In these dungeons though, there are no rooms. It gives every aspect of the temple a sense of connectivity. Instead of isolated puzzle rooms all strung together, each dungeon includes some sort of control that alters the entire map. Now specific items or tools are needed, just this ability to move some part of the beast and all of powers you’re given from the start.

The design of these dungeons embodies breadth. Like, one control that changes the whole place, the whole entire freaking place, one control. One capability that opens all of the necessary paths to all of the individual objectives. The fire temple was the one where it's the clearest. When you rotate the lizard, the entire map is changed, it’s not just one room that’s affected, it's the entire location and your relationship with all of the sub areas. I mean, in both the elephant and bird temples, you can use the control simply for navigation around the place. Like, you can use the trunk to jump off and glide to your desired area, or you can get some good timing on a jump off the moving wing of the bird to land yourself where you wanna get. One feature, one control, multiple uses for various mandatory and optional treasure goals.

Twilight Princess’ dungeons and progression embody depth, linearity, you do one thing after another after another. Breath of the Wild’s dungeons and progression embody breadth, non-linearity, you do or do not do many things in any order using a small set of tools, and this provide deep and valuably complex gameplay scope.

This is the same reason people got upset with MGSV and claimed to have had more fun in GZ. Camp Omega being used for multiple missions under varying conditions fostered gameplay that was deep and breadthy, giving it great multiplicative complexity. MGSV on the other hand only used most bases for a single main mission, giving it significantly much less depth and much more depth. So while GZ’s gameplay is well balanced, MGSV’s is wide in scale but shallow, including little depth. In GZ you do different things all in the same place, in MGSV you do different things in different places. The gameplay is imbalanced. Wait, why are we talking about MGSV again? Aaaaaah forget it.

And you know what? That’s really all I wanted to say. Thanks for watching, hope you had a good time, see ya round jimmie.





So recently, after much thought, I picked up The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. I’ve actually been on Zelda quarantine for a long time, I’ve refrained from watching anyone’s videos and I’ve avoided all media coverage of with the exception of official trailers and nintendo treehouse demos.

What I started getting from the presentations was this MGSV esque vibe. I was worried that it’d just be another open world game, and not a good one. In my MGSV piece I went into how converting MGS to open-world didn’t work out so well and led to a lot of repetitive and exploitable gameplay. I was very worried that the same would be true for Zelda, despite it already kind of being a pseudo open-world sort of game. I was worried that the scope of the game would be too large for it to actually work, but holy crap was I wrong.

Initially, if thought if I ever were to make a video on botw, it would be about this, how the quality of the experience would fade off just like MGSV’s did with extended periods of time, but here I am coming from the complete opposite angle today because we’re about to talk about Breadth.

Now, full disclosure, at the time of writing this, I haven’t even entered a single dungeon. My last play session I was about to begin what I believe is the water temple though, so you might see some footage of that throughout this video.


So why are we talking about breadth? Well here’s the deal, whether you know it or not, you’re actually already familiar with the definition of it, you’ve just probably heard the wrong word associate itself with that definition though.

You ever hear someone call a game deep? Like “oh yeah this game has great depth”, or “depth is what makes a great game”, well, most of the time the thing that causes people to use the word depth to describe a game is actually breadth, the opposite of depth.

So, you’re probably familiar with the geometrical concept of depth, width, height, that crap. When we’re talking about a game though, depth isn’t the distance from the front of the box to the back of the box, we’re instead using the depth defined in graph theory, a branch of discrete mathematics. How do we know this is the depth we’re referring to? Because games are sets of features that interact, they’re a network, they’re a class diagram, they’re a graph, and normally when things like depth are brought up, it’s because of a strongly connected set of features. As soon as you see buzzwords like interactions, coupling, integration, connection, you know you’re talking about graph theory.

I mean, like, please don’t debate me on this unless you understand literally the first thing about object oriented programming. Like, every complex software system is a graph, there are classes that have weighted relationships with each other. This is a thing. I only bring this up because I’ve been hollered about this before. Check yourself before you wreck yourself.

Anyways.

So what is graph theory? It’s basically one of the most important theoretical knowledge sets in the world? Why? Because literally everything is at least a part of one graph or network if you prefer. I don’t want to go too into it, but this stuff comes up in practically every domain, I mean, it’s informatics, everything is information.

Now, to explain depth and breadth, I think it might be easier to use a concrete example. The one I’ll use here is social media, twitter to be precise because I think a lot of people are familiar with it and because I did a project on it last semester.

So, twitter is a superhuge graph. What are the components of a graph? Nodes and edges. Nodes are entities in a network, so here, twitter users, and edges represent relations between them. Edges can be weighted to represent their strengths or be directional. In the case of twitter, all links are directional. If I follow you, it's not guaranteed that you follow me, the link isn’t necessarily bidirectional. Now, the whole twitter graph is huuuuuuuuuuuuge, there are waaay too many users and clusters to see actually derive any meaning from the whole thing at once. So what do we do to make sense of the whole thing? Well, we pick a starting point.

So, you pick a first twitter user, in my social networks project, my twitter account, and then this node becomes the root of a tree, a type of data structure with the same exact properties as a graph. So you go to my twitter account and grab all of my followers, that’s a tree of depth 1. Then you get all of those followers’ followers, and so on and so forth for hours upon hours because the twitter api is restrictive as a north korean vacation. Now, in my project I actually also extracting each nodes “followings”, but lets ignore that because this is the structure we need to look at.

So behold, a tree. We’ve got a root, we’ve got branches and nodes that don’t branch off any further are called “leaves”. Assuming this tree actually contains every twitter user from that main twitter graph (which it doesn’t due to infeasibility BUT ASSUME) and assuming bidirectional edges exist so that the tree isn’t infinite, this tree-shaped graph is actually equivalent to that super huge twitter graph from before, it’s just structured differently.

So here’s the moment you’ve all been waiting for, the definitions of depth and breadth.

The depth of a tree is the maximum distance from the root to a leaf node, it’s the farthest chain of interactions that exists in the network. Each level of the tree increases in depth, we start at the root with depth = 0 and increment by 1 downwards.

Breadth is a little different, it’s not defined for the whole graph, but instead each depth level has a breadth. The breadth of a level is the number of nodes within it.

So there you go.

So what are these used for. A lot of things. Search algorithms are a big deal. Say I want to find a path between two nodes, for instance myself and my primary love interest Hamish Black from writing on gains. One search I could implement would be a depth-first-search, or DFS. I would go down to my first follower, then go to their first follower, then go to their first follower and keep doing that until I either find Mr Black or reach an end node. If that happens, I continue but check an adjacent node at the same depth. The problems with DFS are that it takes a long time if the target node is very close to you in depth and it's also incomplete. If it weren’t for bidirectional edges in my data, you could get stuck in an infinite loop searching. Say from me I check buddycapicolli, but then then from him I check me, and then from me I check him again. You get stuck in an infinite loop and never end up finding a path to Mr Muscle over here. Also if it does find a path, that path isn’t guaranteed to be the shortest path from source to goal, I’ll let you think about why that is.

Another search algorithm, and the one I used in the project is Breadth-First Search, or BFS. As you could assume, here rather than exploring the depths, we first check all of the immediate followers to see if tany of them are attractive and young and scottish. If none are found, we check all of those followers followers so on and so forth. This technique is complete as it’s guaranteed to find a solution if one exists and is also accurate as it always finds the shortest path. In the project I modified it to actually find all paths using BFS though which I later processed using some heuristic I came up with.

So now I know that my shortest paths to Mr Handsome Black are through KingCanoo and NovaGondola. I mean that’s cool, just none of y’all make any moves on my man okay? He’s mine, he’ll be mine. (I love you Hamish, you could write on me anytime if you know what I mean).

Anyways.

The Legend of Zelda Breadth of the Wild. Hahahaha wow very cool and funny! No but for real, that’s what this game is.

So a lot of people have been calling the game very deep, and you know what, that’s not wrong (CROWD SHOCKED SOUND). That depth alone though isn’t why Zelda feels so different. I think everyone knows that this new Zelda is doing something different, but without the proper theoretical foundation to describe it, they’ve been falsely solely attributing it to depth.

Let’s look for a minute at both extremes in terms of depth and breadth.

When it comes to games, it’s ideal to structure the graph as a tree. What’s the root though? I’d call it something like “player input or interaction”, or just “gameplay”. Then from there, you branch off into all of the first things that you can do with the game, or all of the things that can happen in the game.

Want a game that’s pure breadth and minimal depth? Easy, WarioWare. It’s a collection of functionally unrelated minigames that each last like 3 seconds. So from the gameplay root, you branch off into each mini-game node. Do these have depth? Well, I guess they all have a little bit of depth as some of the games have minor variants, but mostly it looks like this. What is WarioWare’s gameplay? It’s a huuuuge bunch of minigames or features that are unrelated to one another and don’t have much depth of their own. The game is about doing different things the whole time.

A game that’s pure depth is harder to pinpoint since every game has some degree of depth. I’d make the argument that rhythm and endless running games are pure depth because you’re doing the same thing throughout the whole game rather than different things, but in different ways. I don’t feel too too confident with that though as I’m not very familiar with those genres, so instead I could show you RE6.

Now, spoiler warning for the RE6 video, but something you could say about that is that the shooting has much more depth than the movement. I mean, the two main things you do in the game are move and aim. From aiming, you can fire, you can switch weapons, you can point your laser and solve puzzles, you can give commands to your AI partner, you can hit various enemies in different places. Certain weapons have advantages against certain enemies. I mean, say what you will about the game but the weapon based combat is pretty deep. Like, just from the aim node, it branches off into so many things. As far as moving goes though, I mean you can sprint, you can attack from a sprint, you can roll around and stuff. Wait no not even, you have to be aiming first before you can roll or do those flips or whatever, so aiming is even related to dodging. I mean it’s kind of deep but nowhere near as deep as the weapons, and that’s maybe the one big issue with the game. They gave you the more versatility in terms of movement but then offloaded more responsibilities to aiming and didn’t particularly make good use of the added freedom of movement, evident is such levels as the one where you have to chase the dog around the graveyard.



So back to Zelda, it’s deep, yes, but it also has incredible breadth at every single level. That’s what makes it so great.

The graph of BOTW would look something like this. Like, assume there are only 5 features in the game or something, this would be it. The root node, the 5 features, and all 5 features linked to each other. In BOTW, practically everything is related, every feature has some meaningful interaction with every other feature. The further you go through the game, the more and more you see this happen.

BOTW isn’t good because it's deep, it’s good because it balances depth and breadth.

In terms of graph theory, I think BOTW’s graph is complete, meaning that every feature shares an edge with every other feature. If not, it’s at least strongly connected, meaning every node is reachable by some path from any other node.

If did a Breadth-First-Search on Breath of the Wild’s graph from any source feature to any target feature, 99% of the time the distance would be 1, meaning that both features are directly related.

Exploration and weapons, yup, weather and weapons, yup, weapons and temperature, yup, enemies and food, yup.

Yo straight up, enemies can go eat a fish if they’re in trouble and need health. I saw this happen once on my way to the zora domain. I’m gonna cut examples there because I don’t know if I can capture any footage of any of the things I’d love to talk about, but I’ll try to get that one at least. Hope, hopefully you’re seeing that right now?

Anyways, playing the game yourself you’ll understand what I mean. No feature in BOTW exists just for the sake of itself, it almost always exists with relation to everything else in the game, or at least most of the other things in the game. Everything has at least some level of coupling to everything else, which is awful in terms of software architecture but necessary in order to build the sort of experience they made.

I would freaking love to see this game’s class diagram, holy crap.

If you’ve seen the GDC presentation, Breaking Conventions with Breath of the Wild, you’ve probably heard that term Multiplicative Gameplay. That kind of says it all right there. When you take an already working system and append a new node at some level or add a new node at a new depth, that’s additive, you’re adding a single unit of complexity or interaction to the system. Increasing depth is additive. When you add a new feature though and define interactions with all of the other already existing aspects of the game, that’s multiplicative, well, it’s exponential really. If the current complexity of a game is N, adding a new feature this way increases the complexity to N^2. Now that, that’s mighty bananas.


After FFXV, I thought I decided that the more linear story guided open-world approach was the one I prefered because I really enjoyed it. I really thought BOTW would be another throwaway open-world adventure, I thought it would crumble under the weight of its own strongly connected graph, but it freaking doesn’t, the graph holds up and holy crap I know I haven’t even completed a single dungeon, but I have no complaints about any of the stuff I’ve done so far. This, this is a guud game.



Hey, people! Some of us, we’ve got hands, we’ve got shoulders, we’ve got knees and we’ve got toes. And sometimes a computer game’s interface may allow us to use one or more of these appendages in order to control it. Sometimes this can be great! If done with the appropriate technology and great enough accuracy it can remove a layer of abstraction between you and your control over your player character, making it easier to get done what you’d like to get done in a game. However, improving the fidelity of control in a game, often its an advantage, an upgrade, a powerup. Giving a player direct command, the ability to reach their hands right into the game world to affect their agency, unless a game is designed with this consideration, well then it doesn’t matter how cool and accurate the motion is, it makes for a bad time… ouf… I’m getting ahead of myself, bare with me for a moment…

Last year I made a video highlighting a trio of key factors that in my opinion the complete set of made for good motion controls in a game, eventually pleading the case that multiplayer mode of Call of Duty 4 Reflex, the Wii edition, addressed each of them and so was a great example of a well-designed motion controlled game.

So, let’s recap. What are those three key factors? First, the main mechanics of a motion controlled game should be linked to simulative control. That’s to say, the gestures and actions you perform with through this interface should be translated with enough accuracy such that if you’re good at the thing you’re doing, you’ll be good at the game you’re doing it in. So, if you’re good at boxing you’ll be good at the simulative boxing game packaged with Wii Sports… or rather, no, the complete opposite! Wii Sports, as a whole, is actually a fantastic example if this first rule being broken but the game “cheating” its way almost to a point where it's acceptable, more details in my previous video if you’re interested, but notably in the boxing game it totally fails. Simply put, if you’re good at boxing you won’t necessarily be good at the boxing game. That’s because rather than translating your movement to approximate the moves pulled off the the character, the game actually expects very specific inputs for each type of punch, those being only X axis rotation, of which there are only 3 accepted positions, and waggle direction, of which there are only 2. Now, not to toot my own horn, but sometimes I forget that I’m officially a professional at Wii Sports boxing, ha, yeah, cool dude over here, so to me it’s clear why this issue, through to you it might not be. Lemme give you an example. You ever pull off an uppercut in the game, and most importantly, mean to? Odds are no, because see, the gesture you’d typically expect to trigger an uppercut doesn’t actually upper...cut it… ouf, that is unless of course somehow you think pointing the remote downward and shaking it to the side translates to the sick punch.

Wii Sports Boxing is a poopoo because the predetermined gestures it expects you to perform aren’t simulative. So what’s one way to fix that? Well that happens to be our second key factor: give the player some choice in how they’d like to control things. I mean, configurable inputs and sensitivities are the norm in most all games these days, so if you’re demanding actual physical movement of a player in order to act in a game, the least you could do is allow them do define their own controls and ranges and whatnot.

Call of Duty 4 on the Wii masters this. The oh so familiar button mapping screen is accessible, but interestingly not only can buttons be mapped but so to can gestures, controller rotation, and combinations of both. Combined with a nunchuck controller, these options allow you to fully customize your gameplay controls to your liking or to suite an otherwise clunky peripheral like the Wii Zapper who’s default control scheme uses a single button to throw all grenades, but depending on if you’re tilting your controller to the left or to the right will either throw your frags or flashbangs.

On top of input mapping however, the player is given a peek under the hood and the opportunity to make choices about all sorts of other things. From a fully customizable deadzone, a concept unique to motion-controlled first-person shooters, complete with different choices for hip aiming and down sites, all the way to things like sensitivity in all sorts of different states of play, or how the camera should behave when you do a certain action, or how much force should be necessary to register a waggle as a knife attack, if of course you’ve decided to set the knife to waggle. There’s just, there’s just total control over your agency in the game, and most importantly, and to COD’s great benefit, all of these controls are manageable live in-game at any point. It’s just, I’ve never played a game with such a unique set of control options that also thought them out so thoroughly and gave me complete access to its innards. Again, I go much more into it in last year’s video so check that out if you’re interested, but for now I’m skipping over.

The third, and arguably most important key factor in whether or not a motion controlled game works well, the maker or breaker in many cases, is whether or not the game in question considers its interface, or in other words, that the game is designed for motion controlled gameplay. More often than not you’d expect to see people attribute gimmick controls with unfairness, clunky gestures and inaccurate readings getting in the way in contrast to the certainty of a button press. But when done properly, which is what we care about, you actually have the complete opposite type of unfairness.

This is what happened in RE4 Wii Edition. Turning aim into an analog, a continuous event, and adding a special gesture for knife equipping and use, these overpowered the player in a lot of ways, they made it very easy to play Resident Evil 4 at a level that only an extremely skilled player could in the original versions. Luckily, RE4 had a dynamic difficulty system which meant players of the Wii version would automatically be faced with harder challenges, unintentionally balancing this out. You could certainly understand though how improved controls could totally ruin a game unready to handle them, designed without them in mind, and you could definitely imagine the opposite too.

While RE4’s original clunky tank-style movement was only aided by motion controls, the twitchy fast-paced action of Call of Duty was slowed down by them. Not to bore you, but the then industry standard for Wii fps games, the deadzone aiming system, it meant that character rotation couldn’t be instant as it was no longer coupled to aiming, that turning was now only a very deliberate action requiring a very deliberate input, not a byproduct of aim. This slowed down the pace of player movement and actions in the game considerably, but of course the campaign wasn’t updated or changed in any way to suit this, and so many levels were just too hard and unenjoyable.

The lack of this key factor, of the game being designed and enemies and encounters being balanced for motion controls and their impacts on how they would change the way a player played the game, the the lack of this broke Call of Duty 4’s campaign yes, but it’s multiplayer survived.

Why’s that? Well, in pitting the game’s players all against each other, the disadvantages they had in single-player didn’t matter because now they were all on the same playing field! Later Call of Duty games for the Wii and WiiU supported more traditional controllers as well, but COD4’s multiplayer was, and still is, it’s actually still running I’m not joking! But it was this magic sort of experience because it’s one of very few first person shooter games that can exclusively be played amongst people using a simulative motion control systems.

In case you’re interested in doing any extra research, cause this is just something that really really interests me, uh, the only few games likes that before, you know, the emergence of VR were the Conduit and the Conduit 2, so the Conduit series, and this uh, this Metal Gear Solid 4 arcade cabinet that you played with like a VR goggle headset and you controlled it with your head and you had a gun also, it was really weird. But these were really the only games that I’m aware of at least that were multiplayer focused and only with motion controls, so uh, yeah, definitely check those out if ever you’re interested in uh, looking into this some more.


Now, as games have progressed we’ve seen a massive decline in support for motion controlled games and a massive increase in support for networked multiplayer, and as we know correlation implies causation so people would rather play against others online than play with themselves, even if it's super realistic and feels like the real thing, if you catch my drift. Uh, actually maybe that’s wrong.

Motion controls haven’t completely disappeared, in fact when they are present they’re hella sicker than they used to be now that the whole industry has converged to gyros as the standard. So finally, touching on the title of this actual video, in investigating the place motion controls have made for themselves in multiplayer games, we can see just how important it is that ALL THREE of those key factors are respected, that the COMPLETE SET is present, least you wind up with a crappy game that was better off without such a control set up.



ARMS is a fun little fighting game for the Switch with a really well made motion control system. Part a step up from Wii Sports boxing, part its own unique gimmick, ARMS is a game full of charm and accessibility as motion controls are used for launching and directing curved punches as well as moving around the stage and blocking, while easy to reach buttons are used for dashes and jumps.

Most everything about this fast paced fighting game can be controlled via simulative actions, on a technical level it totally works, and it’s really impressive. It feels great making minute adjustments to your punches as your stretchy arms fly across as far as they can reach, it feels great shifting to block and breaking out to counter, it feels great affecting grabs from a long range by physically reaching out your arms towards your opponent. It’s all really really cool, the motion control system in this game is probably one of the best commercially available… but that doesn’t mean that ARMS is a good motion controlled game.

See, as a fighting game, ARMS emphasizes multiplayer matchups and ranked fights, and when getting some experience in these you realize that motion controls just aren’t a feasible option when matched up against opponents who’ve chosen to use an alternative control system, the typical digital one, the controller.

It may not have been the focus of the game’s advertisements or box cover or splash screen, but ARMS supports gamepad controls. You can play ARMS almost exactly the same with the controller, the only difference being that you can’t curve punches independently of each other, that feature is only possible when using and reserved for detached joycons. But aside from that, the whole game plays the same. You move, you dodge, you block, you punch, and you grab, except, and in exchange for one feature, you get the ability to greatly improve your input speed.

I mean, there’s no questioning the fact that it takes less time from thought to execution of any move when using just your thumbs and fingers rather than your whole forearms. In a game such as this which, when you boil it down, is just rock-paper-scissors with timing, it’s almost impossible to expect to be able to put up a fair fight when you’re strapping real punches while your enemy’s fingers are all already hovering over their triggers. There’s just, there’s nothing you can do! You can’t react fast enough to counteract enemy moves and pulling off each of your own actions takes too much time and deliberation and thus is too easy for your enemy to counteract. Basically, the super fun super sick way of playing ARMS doesn’t give you a fighting chance against someone of the same skill level who’s just mashing at their controller.

Which is true self reflectively also: no matter how good you can grow to be with the motion controls in ARMS, you’ll always be better with the standard controller. Even if it weren’t for the reaction time benefits, just the fact that your inputs are freaking deterministic sets your performance up a notch. Yeah, you know what? Gyro tilts and waggle are super cool and most of the time they work… but on the off chance they don’t they can ruin a game. ARMS is especially guilty of matching some actions to similar gestures that can be confused for one another in really wacky ways. So for instance, movement in motion controlled games is often hard to do and more often than not just ends up being handled by a joystick attached to one of the motion controllers. ARMS doesn’t do this, instead borrowing and extending a page from the book of Wii Boxing by making player movement linked to the rotation of the joycons. You shift them different directions in order to move those ways, it’s okay. Problem: say someone launches a punch at you and you’d like to switch directions quickly and then press the dodge button… well that might work… or it might not because if you accidentally shake your controllers too hard while intending to change directions, the game might interpret that as a grab command which is launched by thrusting both controllers at the same time. This can happen with blocks too. Moving quickly to the block stance can easily be interpreted as a grab, or if done while moving, it might get picked up as a punch with one arm.

So, basically, for as cool and as fun as the motion controls are, they just can’t possibly hold up against opponents who aren’t using them or even yourself without them. On a technical level yes they mostly work, but in the actual game, in the multiplayer ecosystem that it presents, they just don’t fit and would have been better off omitted.


If you’ve ever played a Mario Kart title from the Wii onward, you probably know exactly what it’s like. Yeah, motion controls are fun, but because the game pools you in with players who aren’t using them, who are basically playing with a different set of rules than you, you kind of forfeit your success. You’re just, you’re at a disadvantage, the properties of the control system you’re using are disadvantageous relative to other players, for instance with motion controls it’s harder to stay straight meaning you can lose some speed and get overtaken on straight-aways, ouch, call me taxi fam!

Now, time to time you might rank out on top, after all Mario Kart is luck based, and when you do, letting everyone know that, yes, you were using tilt-controls, it’s just like this little added bonus, this piece of honor. You get to know everyone’s tilted looking you saying “Daaaaang that dude topped our charts AND he waggled himself up there”, but that’s it. Nobody’s thinking “hmmm maybe I should try those controls, maybe they’ll give me a leg up” no, nobody’s saying that cause it’s just, it’s a fluke. Standard controls are always better, they give you more precision and take less effort, which need I remind you is a function of time, to operate.



Now, clear way to fix this which I’ve alluded to already is to include filtered matchmaking that can strictly pair motion controlled players up together. These different modes of play, these different modes of control impose certain additional rules on players, so it’s only fair to allow them a way to play against others in the same boat. In the example of COD4 which forced this on everyone, players saw how the games mechanics and systems were the perfect home for a different kind of game, a more slow paced tactical team shooter. This only worked because everyone was sitting there pointing remotes at their screens, there wasn’t a single rogue bumbo running around playing the game like a twitch shooter. Everyone was slow, so it worked.

If either ARMS or Mario Kart had some sort of option to only match you against players using motion controls, then they would make much more sense as an included feature. You’d think that there’d be less people to matchmake against but that’s not true. As we’ve explored the only reason there are so few players using these control systems is because they’re not viable against those who aren’t. Right now there’s no safe space to even begin familiarizing yourself with these sorts of controls because you always get out-punched by someone else who’s playing a much easier version of the same game. Providing a strict filtered mode like this though would give more players that opportunity to measure themselves against others more fairly, ensured that everyone is playing by the same rules.

And on top of that, like, I know I’ve brought this up before, but like, just personally, I think there’s something really cool about playing against others online knowing they’re using motion controls too. In COD4 on the Wii, everything that you do and that players do back to you is so much more personal because you know that someone on some couch somewhere had to physically move their bodies to do it. Every kill is someone aiming at you and pulling a trigger, every leaning character is someone tilting their wrist to peek around corners. It’s just, I feel like in a lot of multiplayer games its easy to forget that each of your allies and opponents is another person with a life and enough money to pay for a system and a game and an internet connection, but when playing something like this, it brings you back to reality and you can really appreciate the skills of your competitors more. It’s just, it’s something else, it’s something straight out of a sci-fi or something.




So, why am I really making this video? Is it not enough that I actually just really am totally interested in developments in motion controlled games? No, it’s not.

So few months ago I’m checking the switch store, heart set on picking out a rogue-like to play in transit, got a few flights planned for the next year. Boom, one stands out, Sky Rogue, a half arcade half flightsim ALL rogue-lite and that trailer just blows me away.

See, as a kid I liked flight sims a lot, used to have this star wars one on pc where you played as a cargo delivery guy or something, really liked the rogue squadron series, all the Factor 5 games, ye. My one issue though was their structure. Like, I like flying, I like dogfighting, and I like commanding my wing-mates, but what I don’t like is having only 3 lives and being forced to restart these long drawn out missions again and again just to progress the story, especially when the missions are already broken into chunks. Like, the content is there, I just never felt like it was delivered in the right way.

But suddenly I’m watching this trailer and it’s all clicking. Rogue-like, that’s it! That’s what fighter pilot games are meant to be! That’s how they should be structured, this is amazing!


And then… ooooooh and then… they show off the Danger Zone mode, holy crap my jaw is on the floor! Danger Zone is a mode exclusive to the Switch that lets you control the game with the joycon motion controllers. One controler mimics your flight stick, the other your throttle, and from the way they’re showing it off it looks like so much fun.

Spoiler alert, I bought the game, and decide from the get-go that I don’t even wanna bother with the regular controls, I don’t wanna have anything to do with them, I only want to familiarize myself with the simulative set up and become a freaking ACE pilot!

Spoiler alert… I haven’t bothered with the motion controls since, wanna guess why? Well lets go over those three key factors to find out!

Are the controls simulative? Yes! It feels sooooo cool flying the plane like this. The cockpit view helps really seal that immersion in. Your flight stick in the game moves one-to-one with your joycon, and the throttle sits neatly on the side and moves along with you also, you can see your actions and movements reflected in-real time in the game. It’s just, it’s something else. Banking and turning and pushing full power and pulling up at the last second to avoid crashing, deeking around enemy fighters, using the triggers on the flight stick to fire weapons, oh my god everything about this is fantastic. These are the most impressive casual flight sim controls I’ve ever seen, it’s so seamless and natural. Not even a question, this is simulative as hell!

So, how about customizable controls? Well, as far the general motion goes it’s basically as good as you can ask for. I mean, flight games aren’t really so input-intensive, all you really need aside from buttons are your speed and pitch and yaw controls, which the pair of joycons is more than enough to handle.

Those buttons though, well, I’d say they’re not ideal but really they’re just not fair. For context, let's look at how it works when you’re using the controller. You got speed up and slow down as the two triggers, you’ve got buttons for firing, one for launching flares, stick clicks for rolls, you use the directional buttons to select a weapon from your loadout, of course organized according to the d-pad, and you’ve got two buttons for toggling and locking the camera perspective onto a specific enemy target, this helps for pursuits and stuff, and you can also use the right stick to move the camera freely, independent of flight controls, just to have a look around.

Now, you could probably tell this is a fully loaded, this is an all-dressed controller setup. Everything, everything on the controller is used, every button is necessary to play this game. Now, in removing the joycons technically you have the same amount of buttons available, right? Except, the way you’re asked to hold it, it makes certain inputs inaccessible.

So, playing with motion controls, the first thing you notice is gone is the quick weapon select. The d-pad? Well, sadly its hidden under your throttle now, on the opposite side of your palm, so instead weapons are selected by pressing on of the trigger buttons on the flight-stick while the other is used to fire. But wait, how you gonna select between 4 possible missile types with a single button? Easy, you’re gonna cycle through them like a freaking scrub. In the middle of breakneck dogfighting and tactical planning, asking a player to properly sift through and distinguish the correct weapon type amid a few others that are visually very similar, that’s ridiculous, and that’s without even considering that this is a game designed originally to have weapon selection be a single button press.

Then, you notice that your defensive and evasive moves are a little hard to reach too. If at least one was easy, sure, but both? It’s hard to get to roll and to fire flares, this is kinda of unacceptable, especially, again, considering this is a game originally designed for each of these to be a single button press.

So what about camera controls? Well, free camera is still mapped to the stick, which sadly your whole hand is wrapped around, forget manipulating that with your thumb. It’s funny because if you try to you’ll likely accidentally tilt the controller to make it easier to reach the stick, but since this is motion controlled you’ll wind up, well, losing [burp] uh your gas.

It’s funny because if you try to you’ll likely accidentally tilt the controller to make it easier to reach the stick, but since this is a motion controlled game you’ll wind up, well, losing control.

You’ve got those perspective locking buttons again also, but as was the fate for the rest of these inputs, physically reaching those buttons is harder than their worth.

And it’s not exactly related to motion controls, technically this happens in the normal game but bombs, right, so, when you equip one you get this marker on the ground indicating where the bomb will land, but in that view you lose control of the plane and the camera locks to that perspective as if it were an enemy. Makes sense I guess I don’t wanna shoot bombs upwards right? I don’t know. So, this is a little jank but you get used to it… unless of course you’re playing in cockpit view as you likely would for the sake of immersion when going à la motion control. When you do this, the camera still locks to the ground, but now the cockpit, or rather the whole plane can be moved independently and twist and turn all around. Now you might say, “well ya freaking idiot, don’t do that then”, to which I’d respond “ma how in the heck then you want me to drop bombs on the ground when my own freaking airplane is blocking my view!?”

So what you’ve gotta do just to actually see where you’re dropping a bomb in first-person is you’ve gotta lock onto the ground, then you’ve gotta flip your plane upside-down via motion, so now basically you’re horizontal direction is reversed, and then, plane upside-down, camera right-side-up, you can drop your bomb. But watch out! As soon as you switch back to a regular weapon, the camera comes back to normal and suddenly you’ll be upsi-freaking-down and totally disorientate yourself.

That, okay, that, that is, and I don’t use this word lightly… but that, is caca.





You know, it wouldn’t be as disappointing if it weren’t for the facts that the game is expertly crafted, it's super fun, and that the motion controls themselves are super responsive and excellent. Just, it’s a shame that they don’t work together, like, at all. Unlike ARMS where at least there’s some sort of special ability reserved for motion, here you’re ONLY at a disadvantage compared to a controler. Also unlike ARMS though this game isn’t multiplayer, so does it matter?

Well, see the game, like we’ve said, was originally designed with a certain type of gameplay in mind. Danger Zone was closer to an afterthought than a requirement, at least from what I can gather. You can definitely understand the perspective of someone with a built, completed game suddenly having new tech thrown in their lap, building a quick prototype and going “dang dude this is pretty gnarly”, and then not really adapting the design of the challenges in the game to it. You can definitely get that, I can definitely get that. I mean, I’ve done this. I’ve put effort into features before that didn’t work exactly as intended but were super cool, and I’ve also pushed live fully-fleshed out features that’ve been scrapped, and I know that that sucks. I get what it’s like to discover and build something really cool and want to demo it to people and share it with people even though it’s not completely polished.

And that’s what bothers me a lot about this game and how it makes me feel. I mean, aside from the fact that you can fly out of bounds and under the ocean if you’re a patient ex qa tester type like myself, this is an extremely well made and polished package, it’s a crazy fun game, it made me re-think fighter jet games as a whole and realize why I got tired of the ones I played as a kid. It’s just this one feature which ultimately doesn’t need to be there that kind of ruins it for me. Like, I honestly think I would have more respect for the game if this had been omitted, it doesn’t need to be here, even if it's just intended as an extra gimmick feature, it should be reserved at that point for an extra gimmick mode.

I mean, obviously I’m sure there’s some better way it could have been included, maybe have a Danger Zone version of the game where enemies react slower or have fewer weapons and the hud is transparent and maybe your weapon ranges are buffed a little bit, I mean that’s just some options to rebalance the handicaps of the motion controls. But without those the feature kind just lasts until you die enough times to realize its not a viable way to play when you have an easier and more accurate control option.

So uh, in case you didn’t notice, the third key factor? We just segued into it super smoothly and covered it, no need to make an awkward flow breaking announcement and transition to it, such as the unnecessary one we’re doing right now.



So what am I trying to say? What am I trying to say about freaking video games today? I’m trying to reiterate that for a motion controlled game to be good it needs to have the complete set of the following key factors:
Controls need to be simulative in nature.
Controls need to be as customizable as possible within reason.
And the game’s challenges need to be designed around the player’s mode of interaction, i.e them there motion controls.

If a single one of these, most invisibly the third one, is neglected (such is the case with ARMS and Mario Kart), or overlooked (such is the case with Sky Rogue), then the quality of the experience of the player takes a hit, ouch. I mean, look, in the case of the last key factor this is understandable. The first two are pretty easy to nail, this one though? Yow. Games are a living medium, software is developed typically iteratively. Late stage requirements, heck yeah they’re gonna bite, trick is to make sure that they don’t sink their teeth in at the expense of the player though. Look, if a feature is better off removed for the sake of consistent quality, I say do it, give it some more thought, some more time to cook in the oven, let it get gooooood, and then when it's ready, serve that boi to everyone!

What am I trying to say? What am I trying to say about freaking video games today? I’m trying to say, and I’ve been trying to say for two videos now, that one really really easy way to ensure that that most complex third key criteria is met is to replace designer driven challenges with player driven ones. Don’t put a guy up against a bunch of high performance AI opponents, put them up against other players! Motion-controlled multiplayer is fast-track to ensure that the challenge is fair for all the players and that the super cool motion-controls are a viable playstyle.

Now, is that a costly feature? Yes. Doesn’t it carry its own set of baggage like not exactly being the most accessible thing for all players? Yes. Should we care? Absolutely, I hope to actually cover that in a gimmicky future video, ay, subscribe to my patriot so I can get a windows vr headset and not be judged by my whole family for spending my own money on that… its probably what’s gonna happen anyways I’m just gonna do it.

But yeah, both of those. What am I trying to say? Oh yeah, I want a multiplayer focused motion-control only mode of Sky Rogue. That would be cool. That would be like game of the year every year for the next, like, I don’t know, maybe like one and a half years.

But I mean, it’s still really good. Uh.

I’m gonna go now, I’m gonna make, I’m gonna make like a tree and brexit. Smell ya nerds later fam. Peace.






Hello and welcome to the sweaty endscreen! Uh, let's get it started and lets get it done, brief. First thing’s first, I will not be charging anyone on Patreon for this video. There are a couple of reasons for that. First one being that, if you are a patron or you’re someone who’s at least been following me for about a year, uh, and as I hinted at the beginning of this video, this video kinda of started as its own original idea but as it went I realized I was just kinda reformulating, albeit in a better way, topics that, and subjects that I brought up in last year’s video about motion controls.

So I felt like it wasnt really fair to charge anybody for that because it kind of just took on the same purpose of that video with a tiny little thing at the end, and so,

Second being that I wanted to save time by not reading out the list of names because there’s something I actually do want to discuss that I feel like I should before this video ends. There’s one stone left unturned so to speak. I’m sorry by the way if I sound weird or artificial in any way, it’s just that it’s really sweaty turning off all the fans and everything because it’s humid as heck here! And I just kinda wanna get this over with as fast as I can, so you know let's just… HHHHOOO!

So Sky Rogue is evidently an independently developed game. As far as I can tell, there are two people who worked on it, one programmer, one artist. So, um, independent games aren’t really anything I’ve really ever covered in any of my videos. Uh, and I feel like it’s little bit more personal when you talk about something like that because, you know, really there’s a higher likelihood that you would reach these people because they’re not getting as much feedback as these big studios, and maybe they’re receptive too cause they’re, I don’t know, more, closer to artists than they are just systems pumping out products, you know?

So covering something like this, I thought it would make some sense to actually try to reach out to somebody on the team who made this. Uh, this is the sort of thing I would want if people ever criticized me, god knows people have criticized my work in various different ways and I feel like that’s always the best way, when you’re somehow you know, made aware of these things. Because tackling an independent developer in the wrong way with the wrong feedback in the wrong tone, doesn’t do anybody any good.

So at a point where I kinda knew where this video was going, I contacted the programmer, uh and I kinda laid out a full breakdown of the entire video up to that point, which really nothing much changed. Uh and I had some questions and I kind of wanted maybe the opportunity to clarify some of the things I was gonna say, I wanted to make sure that the assumptions I was making were grounded, and I wanted to try to understand why certain things ended up the way they did in the final game. And originally he was really receptive, uh he did mention that he was pretty busy and he might be able to respond, uh, immediately. But it kinda got to a point where I realized he just wasn’t going to after, uh, laid that out.


It’s very possibly my fault! Uh, the way I, I presented my questions and everything was little bit unorthodox, but uh, very on-brand, if, if, if I’m gonna do anything I’m gonna do it right you know?


So all this to say, I’m not trying to throw any shade, I’m not trying to, you know, I’m not even mentioning this guys name cause evidently he, he didn’t really, I mean I did give him, uh, I asked him some questions and I asked if he would like to be a part of this and he didn’t respond so, obviously he doesn’t want to or didn’t have the time to respond, I don’t really know, that’s the thing.

I just wanted to lay out the fact that I’m pooping a little bit hard on an independent game and I wanna make clear that I didn’t just do this in some little echo chamber, like I tried to reach out, so, uh, maybe this a little bit awkward to mention in a video endscreen like this but really it’s the first time that I’ve, you know, I’ve felt like I was personally attacking somebody by criticizing their game when really I, I didn’t want it to come across as that. I want to come across as someone with a lot of questions, and I feel like I was hoping that just my background in software development would be enough to make sure that I touched this subject, uh, appropriately and professionally but I was still worried so I did reach out to this guy, turns he was Canadian too so, you know, we bonded over that I guess. Not really, uh, cause, you know, he never wrote back…

But I digress. That’s really what I wanted to get across. I don’t want someone to come out someday and say “this guy said all this crap and he didn’t even make an effort” like I, I did. That’s all I want to say is that I did, and I think that’s, even though it failed this time, even though I didn’t get any sort of response, I think that this, you know, contacting people on these smaller game projects that I may possibly look at in the future, I think that’s a practice that I would like to keep up because, um, I feel like it's a little bit garbage not to? Especially coming from where I am, cause, I mean, obviously I look at games a little bit differently than some people, like I’ll see something and I’ll be like, like, I can really, like, I relate to someone who, who, is making these things, and I’m always thinking about how did they develop these, um.

So it feels a little bit crap to just sit there and crap all over a game, um, and not really give somebody a chance to you know, make all these assumptions and all drop all this stuff, and really it’s just easy to send a quick email, or a video message, or something to somebody and be like “yo wassup! Can I just ask you some questions about your game. Like, I don’t wanna sound like a jerk, but I might accidentally, so please give me this opportunity to make my myself, you know, a little bit smarter, and uh, also give you the sort of feedback that you need based off your input”. But, really that’s it so…

And that’s that! Uh, thank you so much for watching! Again, for the reasons stated, won’t be charging anybody so please don’t worry about that. I know this is, I wouldn’t feel right charging anybody for this video. But I hope you did appreciate all of the, all of the gopro, well not the gopro but the action-cam footage, uh, I recorded for this video, that I, the action camera that I purchased with, well not with necessarily, but I probably wouldn’t have if it weren’t for patreon. I really like, I looked and it and was like “you know what? I, you know what? I can pay for this with patreon money, I could buy this camera” and you know what? I have some plans, I am going to drive this camera into the ground, you’re gonna see how much use I get out of this, for these goofy video essays, it’s gonna be unbelievable. Stick with it. Anyways, uh, thank you guys. I’m gonna, I’m gonna cool the heck down now, I’m gonna do a little striptease first, see y’all later, oh man now you get to see all my rolls!


Hey, another year, another dollar.



Now, this is a game that technically came out at the end of 2016, but this time last year was when I played it and arguably so much work has gone into over the past 365 days that it’s almost a whole new game at this point.

What continues to surprise and impress me about this game is the development process behind it and the amount of effort being spent on it. Coming from the field of study I did, I can tell you that this game, the technology behind it and the way it was all put together is like, the best-case scenario we’d only talk about in theory in our classes. We’d discuss this perfect software engineering utopia where all sorts of management concepts would be applied, but preparing us for industry jobs we kind of knew it was a fairytale, nobody ACTUALLY builds software like we were being taught, but then in comes final fantasy to straight finalize something that only existed in fantasy. Sadly, it makes me wonder how they rationalize or justify so much effort spent. Half of me hopes that the game has been financially successful enough to fund itself, but seeing things like the CEO putting himself in the game for special events makes the other half of me believe that the only reason we’re still seeing features continuously integrate themselves into this year-old finished product is because the people behind it are incredibly passionate.

Now don’t get me wrong, I’m not complaining, that’s great, I just wish that their unique and credit-worthy process was enough to drive interest and sales and keep the thing going. I wish more people could look at how this game is being made and just appreciate it and perceive it with as much awe as I do. I wish more people could understand that, when it comes to this game, unlike others, your class of stakeholding isn’t just at the end-user level but is much higher. I’m so excited to play the PC release of this game with all the new free features such as all party members being controllable in combat, the first person mode, as well as stuff like the paid extra chapters. Once it looks like things have cooled down, I can’t wait to have a brand new experience with this game that has already proven itself to be one of my favorite games of recent times.

Going back though to the experience I did have, FFXV proved last year that linear stories have a potential to be presented much better in open-world structures through a well paced delivery and mastery of meaningful immersive systems. It sucks that developers of systems disconnected from direct gameplay got a bit of slack from other teams, but the fact that every system melds so well with every other is a testament to how effectively these people were able to work together. Good stuff.




After FFXV, I thought I had decided that the sort of restrictive open-world experience it offered was the type I prefered, especially after the last open world game I had played being MGSV. But then, oh a whim, I got a Switch and Zelda and ended up making two videos with goofy titles about how much I thought that game mattered. I realize now it’s not one structure or the other, both types of experiences can co-exist. FFXV, due to the way it delivers its challenges is able to outclass Zelda in some areas. I would argue for example despite both games being extremely immersive, FFXV is more so in the traditional media sense. By doing things like making you drive with your buddies and fight with your buddies and camp with your buddies and eat with your buddies, giving all of them unique traits and personalities, having them each flex at different points in the game or by painting some extremely technical systems, for example the photography AI, with the personality and expressiveness of a character, through these things the game is able to immerse you in its world just as you could get immersed in a really good book or movie universe.

BOTW doesn’t do that as much or as well, at all, but the way it achieves its immersiveness is through player expression. In this game, you can do whatever you want, you can just ditch everything and roam around for hours and the game never offers any resistance. It’s great, I’ve already spoken enough about it and odds are you’ve already heard enough about it. Probably the best videogame to come out this year. Bless up fam.




Battle Mode Royale is a game that has received a criminally low amount of attention and I hope to correct that today. In fact, this game is really the main reason I wanted to make this video. Nobody I have introduced this to has been disappointed, and honestly I don’t know if there’s a better way to get you into it than by just showing you the first episode, but I’ll try.

So anyone remember youtube in 2006? I do. Back then I was a kid so it made sense I’d end up typing into the searchbar something like “Real Life Pokemon Battle”, and one of the videos that would’ve popped up is this one. Now see this grainy as fuck dude over here? Yeah, this is a 12 year younger version of Kevin Zeef, main channel being BigZeeff. Now surprisingly, it’s possible that this isn’t the only reason you might already be familiar with Mr Zeeff, this was not his only run-in with viral popularity, you might recognize him from, among many other things, some special appearances on american ninja warrior, but anyways.

Kevin’s most impressive, passion-filled and honestly, freaking amazing project is something called Battle Mode Royal, and sadly it hasn’t had the sort of luck his other runaway hits have.

Written a very long time ago and in production for well over 4 years, Battle Mode Royale, a web series produced by BigZeeff and friends and loosely based on one of their old viral videos “Real Life Super Smash Bros Brawl” tells the story of a collection of video game characters held hostage by some shady organization and forced to fight to the death on an island in a live-broadcasted event. It’s basically a cross between hunger-games and smash bros, except with a much broader cast, incredible gore, and honestly some of the funniest comedy video writing I’ve ever bared witness to.

The main character of the series and one of the many roles Kevin himself plays is a washed up Sonic. Some episodes don’t feature him at all, but most, especially the early ones tell the story from his perspective. Kevin’s oblivious and pessimistic Sonic makes for a great lead in a series that has people brutally murdering each other every episode. The special effects typically have this great “sweeded” aesthetic, a lot of them are practical, and some are meta as heck. There’s a scene where Kevin breaks out of character to mention how long it took to render an animation going on in the background, it’s full of the sorts of jokes that literally only work in the medium of video. If you’re a video editor, YOU NEED to watch this. And it’s not that the effects are bad because these guys are bad at making videos, you have to realize that all of this is intentional, it’s supposed to look like this, it makes you feel like an active member of the video’s production. Like, there’s one character, Phoenix Wright, who for some reason is always green-screened into every scene. I honestly don’t know if it’s because this actor worked remotely or if it was in purpose, but it’s hilarious when you start seeing them do workarounds to pull off interactions between him and the other characters.

The characters are all absolute goofs, each of their personalities and attributes are taken to the extreme, and all of the actors have, believe it or not, excellent performances. Like, they’re all friends and they’re all invested in it.

So like, for example Tom Nook is selected to fight with everyone but because he’s crap he sets up a shop in the middle and sells weapons and body parts of other participants, hiring other people who aren’t born fighters, like the Tetris block, who okay, by the way, has a scene later on that’s so dramatic I aaaalmost cried. It’s honestly unbelievable how Zeeff is able to control the tone of these episodes. So anyways Tom Nook sets up the shop and Snake, also played by Kevin, tries to buy something but doesn’t have enough money. So to make a point about everything in the store costing “an arm and a leg” and because Snake’s character is the stereotypically badass super-soldier type, there’s this scene where he just out of nowhere cuts his own arm off and gives it to the shop. It’s like the most absurd ridiculous crap, but it’s great.

Now as you may have noticed, I’m trying not to show any deaths in the clips here because Kevin actually has made the show kind of interactive. Every episode ended with a poll in the description to vote on who you thought would die in the next episode, and at the end the people with the most accurate guesses would win. I mean, it’s kind of late now, but the series isn’t over yet, it’s winding up for the finale finally after all of these years and I don’t want to spoil anything for you.

Look, straight up, Battle Mode Royale is one of my favorite creations I’ve seen anyone do online, and it’s ridiculous to me that BigZeeff has almost as many subscribers as me and pulls in less views than I do. Some of these episodes sit there with less than a thousand views and that, to me, is a travesty. This is such a good series, and I would hate for it to go out, to end, to have a finale without a proper audience.

Guys, straight up, Kevin Zeeff is, I think, one of the greatest entertainers on this platform. Battle Mode Royale is an amazing series, it’s proof that anyone can make good movies without enough time and work. Go watch episode 1 right now, stop this, watch open a new tab, go get it, drop it in your watch later playlist or something, do it now. Trust me, you will not regret this. Let’s all watch the last few episodes together fam, I’m so grateful I was recommended it a while ago and I’m so excited to see how the heck he’s gonna wrap this whole thing up.

Now who recommended Battle Mode Royale to me  you ask? Good question:




3GI is the best channel on youtube. Hands down, nobody else even matters. I don’t think there is anyone on this platform anywhere near the level these guys are at, and let me explain to you why.

3GI is what the future of comedy troupes looks like and they are the only ones I’m aware of doing this sort of entertainment. They’re most known for their super smash brothers tournament videos, which in reality are filmed sessions of what’s really like, an actual real life fight club with the twist being that it’s gaming and smash bros themed. So basically, these folks dress up as characters and use all sorts of props to actually beat the crap out of eachother. These guys are like throwing straight fireworks, not fire crackers, but fireworks at each other. If that doesn’t sell you on this, I don’t know what will. And it weren’t enough just that they’re actually fighting and breaking glass over each other's heads, the videos are edited so interestingly. This guy here is Grant, he’s the editor of the team and for all intents and purposes, the front-man. This dude’s editing style borrows all the best traits on like, youtube poop stuff, but also kind of mimics old bill nye. He often includes cartoon sound effects or samples one sound throughout a whole video as a running gag or a motif. He does the sorts of things within the medium of video that are only possible within the medium of video, half of the comedy isn’t written or performed, it’s IN the video, there are jokes embedded into the very idea of displaying 30 to 60 images per second on a screen with accompanying audio. That’s how deep this dude goes. It is top notch, I love Grant’s editing, if you wanna know where my style and aesthetic have come from, hopefully you’ll see that in him. His style is what I think has inspired mine the most. He’s the kind of guy who’s not afraid to fully invest in an idea that’ll totally fly over the heads of half his audience.

Like, I’ll give you an example, some of his transitions are legendary. In between battles in smash tournament 4, a few layers of printed photographs of the last frame on screen would pop up held up with popsicle sticks, and see this cutout of the wii fit trainer here? I actually own this piece of paper, because on their site where they sell custom shirts, and by custom I mean you write a description of what you want and these dudes straight go to walmart, get a t shirt and then draw on it with markers, but anyways when you get anything from them, they include with it a random piece of trash from some video, and I got this. It’s been in the background of tons of my videos, and honestly until I got it I was oblivious to the fact that these screens in the smash video were a practical effect and not a special effect.

Another absolutely ridiculous transition they’ve done that comes to mind is in the second short film in their Tales from the Creep series, a Shrek themed parody trilogy. In Jurassic Swamp, there’s a part where the video goes absolutely nuts for a second and then fades into a shot of a dude who’s wearing a graphic shirt that has printed on it the screen you were just looking at. I only noticed this on my third viewing of this video, but this is the sort of visual gag that requires extreme commitment and kind of puts the whole video’s production on hold.

The thing with their videos is that on the surface level, there are tons of jokes to catch, like the having one of the miniature helicopters flying around still in the packaging, but if you’re willing to invest more attention, there’s always a payoff.

In a podcast style show they run in the summers, Grant was once asked what his favorite game was and his answer was video editing, if he hasn’t unlisted it I’ll play that clip out for a sec.

But then beyond videos, these guys are never afraid to go above and beyond if an outcome will be funny. You’ve probably heard of an event in wisconsin called Shrekfest right? Well these dudes are the ones who run it, but listen to this, they did it because a fake rumor was spreading about a shrek festival taking place in an attempt to prank people I guess, but after getting goofed themselves by it, 3GI actually called up their city and managed to actually throw together an official event on the original date described in the prank. They made a lame joke into a reality, and now shrekfest is an annual event that tons of people get excited for and attend.

These guys are multiplatform, multimedia entertainers, I mean even their freaking website it a piece of entertainment. If you haven’t already opened them up in a new tab, I suggest you do now. My recommendation is to start with Smash tournament 2 which will give you the context required to watch what is probably their best video ever, Smash Tournament 3. 3 is so good, I’ve heard it described as, like, when you finish that 48 minute video, you feel like you have friends, it’s nuts.


I don’t have a segueway for this one, but Twitter gets #4 game of the year. It’s no secret that developers of all sorts of social networking systems have been applying gamification into their apps to get people more interested and involved, but what people seem to forget sometimes is that you can personally turn anything into a game just by setting goals for yourself.

Over the past year, my self-determined goal on Twitter was to have as much fun as possible with it, and through this a set of sub-goals were made and met.

For instance, at some point I decided I wanted to get the attention of Handsom Black from writing on games, and by goodness gracious was it fun. This was an adventure that led to the creation of the critically acclaimed but not affiliated with tony hawk, twitter account “Hambob’s Bicep” among other things, and honestly I don’t know how any of what I did wasn’t considered just straight up harassment, but at the end of the day Hambob hit da quan so I guess it worked.

I mean, just letting all care for anything go has been a great strategy for having fun on twitter, it’s led to such great moments as the time El Yucateca sent me free merch after I made fun of the t-shirt model on their site, or the time Nikki Sixx, bassist and songwriter of Motley Crew agreed with Hamish and Nico that he did in fact look like an older 80’s rock version of me, or the time that David Jaffe who made God of War and Twisted Metal indirectly called me an idiot. These, among many others, were great moments I could have never had were it not for the fact that, to me, twitter is 100% pure bants, nothing else, no ham, JUST bants.

I have legitmately had more fun with twitter over the past year than I have with some games. Straight up g.




We’re in top three territory now which is where things tend to get pretty controversial, but here I feel like its undisputed that “Getting a Job”, the sequel to last year’s “Do School” was a great title to come out in 2017. It managed to really rework all of the systems from the last game to the point that's basically a whole different experience.

The goal of getting a job, much like twitter, is self determined. It has collectathon elements much like Mario Odyssey, and some people are only in it for that, to walk around aimlessly and collect coins simply for the sake of collecting coins. Others are more interested in the social aspects of it, and others still treat it like a gauntlet of boss rushes, just battle after battle until their reward for beating the final boss, becoming the boss themselves.

Personally, my main goal has always been to learn. I’ve said this before, but if I could realistically just be paid to go to school, like, be a professional student, I would. I love learning new things, I think for a long time just being a student was a part of my identity, to such a degree that after graduating I was filled with anxiety about making videos. I had this realization that the majority of my best videos were ideas I had in classrooms or just applications of knowledge from courses. I stopped and thought, crap, if I’m not learning anything new, how am I going to find new things to say about games and new ways to express them? It was really tearing at me for a while, I got over it, but still, it made me realize how much, maybe not necessarily education but LEARNING mattered to me, how much I valued it.

So to me, finding a job that allowed me to learn, something as close to that fantasy of being  professional student, find a place that wanted somewhat of a blank slate to teach was literally the best case scenario, and it happened and I’m so happy with how supportive everyone has been. Now, does it also feel great to finally be making real money after 4 years being a broke student? Absolutely, it’s great to be able to afford your own place and comfortably operate, but I feel like not working on things you legitimately care about and are willing to commit yourself to would suck, a lot.

That’s why getting a job takes #3 on this list. Though, there was one problem related to the game. Adding it to your library kind of messed with stuff, the installation was a little bit faulty, and as you may have heard, many people actually their save files for other games corrupted. As a result of this, my experience in one of my favorite games of the past few years was affected, and so I had to catch up with it. This one’s kind of cheap again because technically it didn’t come out in 2017, but replaying it this year renewed my love for it so I’m going to count it, and it’s gonna be taking #2 on this game of the year list.



Making Friends has probably been the most important game I’ve played in 2017 and see myself continuing to play in 2018. Much like breath of the wild, the game’s interconnected systems allow for this immersive and complex experience where any player can pretty much try any strategy or tactic they want, and the game always responds properly. Everything’s a stim, everything’s a response.

Now, also much like breath of the wild, the game can be broken down using graph theory. Three very important underlying mechanics in the game that expert players will know to take advantage of are triadic closure, focal closure and membership closure. These concepts can be used by players to find the best places to insert themselves as a node and complete objectives, aka make friends.

Triadic closure is the idea that, in a graph containing 3 nodes, A, B and C, if nodes A and B are connected by an edge and so are B and C, and that nodes represent people and edges represent friendships, then it's likely that A and C will also become friends, closing the triangle, hence the name, triadic closure.

Focal closure is very similar, except it involved a special new node type, a focus node.

Say A and B are people and gaming is a hobby that both of them participate in. As a result of their shared interest in the same thing, there’s a good chance that A and B will form a friendship. This is focal closure, closing a triangle based on focus.

Membership closure, as you could imagine, is a situation where A is a gamer, but their friend B isn’t. In this situation, since B’s friend is a gamer, odds are B will also become a gamer.

There’s also a notion of Balance in social friendship networks that need to be considered. Some edges are weighted, some can be positive or negative. In A situation like this for example, one where the united states and china are friends, north korea and china are friends, and the united states and north korea are enemies, the graph is said to be imbalanced, it isn’t at equilibrium and is guaranteed to change. But you can also used shared enemies as a reason to form a bond. I have a friend who says all it takes to make friends it get crunk and figure out the two of you hate the same thing, which I tend to agree with.

But everything that’s happened to me in my experience Making Friends this year can be attributed to one of these concepts from graph theory, and in moving forward I’ve really been trying to leverage these properties of graphical relationships to most effectively and efficiently beat this game dude, or at least catch up to where I was.



Look, straight up, real talk for a second. Life is really weird, especially when it comes to friendships once you get to the whole higher education scene. School is tough and all, but it’s also this amazing place where friends just fall into your lap. You meet great people and you’re given the opportunity to really bond and get to know them by working together. In higher levels where things get more competitive, the dominant strategy is to avoid switching up your party and just stick with one from the beginning. So much of your grade, whether you realize it or not, is tied to how well you’re able to work together with your team, which something the schools will never recognize, is the sort of thing that gets better the longer you do it. So what you wanna do is form a clique, build a team in first year and then just ride all the way through with the same people. I’m not lying when I say that literally everyone I knew who graduated in my program did that. Everyone stuck together in the groups they formed at the beginning, partly out of necessity since half the classes grade your performance relative to the all the other students.

But once you finish school and get to the sequel, a job, stuff changes. First of all, the friends you’ve made, you go from seeing them daily to barely seeing them. Then making new friends, holy crap is it rough. Where you’re working right out of school, odds are most people aren’t your age or have other responsibilities, you also are starting from scratch all over again so you have to meet everyone and try to learn everything about them. And also, most of them are probably already friends or enemies with each other, the workplace is at equilibrium, so it’s hard to just inject yourself into an already balanced network of coworkers. So the act of making friends, this once natural process that almost felt like it was happening behind the scenes is now something you have to work on so hard. If you wanna go from acquaintances to friends with people, it’s a grind, its awkward, you’re gonna have to use all those special items and power moves you’ve been saving up like somersaulting and breakdancing and going absolutely bananas just as a show, like a primitive display of bodylange to say “hello I am crazy and want to have friends that think this is cool, please join I am a lonely boi fam”, and even after all that, no matter how hard you try there’s still a chance people will be completely unresponsive to it because least we forget this isn’t a singleplayer game, it’s an mmo, all of your competitors are real people who make up this ecosystem, and some have already reached their self-set goals, some have different goals than you. Not only is it hard to make friends, but it’s hard to make the types of friends you used to have and it’s hard to read your opponents to tell what they’re looking for, but you have to try because if someone is trying to be your friend, you have to feed them back that read otherwise you’re just block canceling each other or something.

What do I know about fighting games? Nothing.

But making friends can happen in other contexts too, for instance, if you’re part of my audience it’s likely you watch other video essayist creators online also, and if so, it should be no surprise to you that many of us are good friends with each other and regularly shoot the ship. You’ve probably noticed how often we all bant with each other over twitter or in podcasts or in my case just straight up on screen, and this is all because of focal closure.

You hear people complain a lot that modern communication technologies have weakened people’s social skills, but through my experiences I would say I feel like we have the same quantity of in-person social interaction as the generations before us, just now our reach extends far beyond physical limitations. I have friends all over the world that I may or may not ever meet and that I’ve met purely as a result of focal closure, of all of us either being interested in or doing the same sorts of things, and honestly that’s magic, that’s how you should look at it. We live in a world where a dude in Canada and pose and a Scottish dude’s bicep and then become friends. Describe that without the word magic, or harassment, whatever.

And focal closure, foooocal closure. This, this is how I was introduced to the game that tops this list, the game that I had the most fun playing in 2017, the game that I think you all know very well, that I’m sure you knew would top this list as soon as you saw me drop a top games of the year video. Ladies and gentlemen, my pick for #1 most important, most influential and most downright fun game of 2017 is...








Kevan, or as he’s known here on youtube, BobbyBroccoli, is the title I had the most fun with in 2017.

Kevan and I met as a result of the closure of multiple focuses, see, he and I share a ridiculous amount of characteristics. We both write video essays, we both blew up with spongebob related videos, like, we’re the top two results for many youtube searches, including but not limited to “bfbb review”, or at least we were until Cooper pulled up on the block. DUUUDE, listen to us! We’ve been down this road, we need to warn you of where you’re going before its too late! You’re running headfirst into a curse fam, yo hit us up. And the two of us were also engineering students.

I had recognized BobbyBroccoli for always showing up in my recommended videos, and legend has it that Kevan was first introduced to me after including a picture of Jack Black in a video once and a commenter asking if it was me.

It was only after meeting within the context of a video essayist discord server that we realized that I lived in Montreal, yeah, I didn’t even know where I lived until I started talking to him, I had no idea where the heck I even was my entire life, yup, that’s correct. But no, yeah, um, so we realized that we actually lived really close to one another. I’m out here in the mtl and Kevan was in Ottawa, so like 2 hours away from each other. After Kevan landed a co-op summer internship near montreal though, we realized that there was some higher power at play. A whole summer in the same city, faaaaaaaaaaaaam the stage was set.

Having Kevan around was a good time, to be honest I kind of had neglected, like, living life properly while in school, not for nothing, I finished with great grades, but like, I still struggle with, like, bar etiquette just because I can probably count the number of visits to pubs I’ve been to in my life on my two hands. But like, having someone around who was visiting was an excuse to basically tour my own city and just explore and stuff.

Having him around also helped me perceive how little free time I had been alotting myself recently and how much I wanted that to change. We tried to do stuff as often as possible, but I realized that some weekends were being packed beyond my control and this limited my ability to just do whatever I wanted to do or make last minute plans, which has been a valuable lesson that is definitely going to have an impact on my life moving forward I think.

Having him around was good to because of how much we were able to relate to one another. For as I particular as I thought the attributes of my life are, it’s kind of special to just know that you’re not alone, that there’s someone going through basically the same exact thing you are. We were able to talk about the sorts of videos we wanted to make, the sorts of videos some of our other video essay friends were making, the directions we wanted to take our careers and hobbies into, how to maximize our fun in every possible way through our common interests.
On one of our first nights out, Kevan told me about a motto of his, “commit to the bit”, which all jokes aside is something I’ve really been taking seriously. It’s all about execution, if you come up with a funny idea, a goofy plot, a bit, stop worrying and just commit to it, commit to the bit. That night, commit to the bit resulted in me just walking into a hairdresser at like 8 at night to wash my ice-cream covered hands, and then it was just uphill from there.

I mean, commiting to the bit allowed us to leverage what social media presence we had to get a free pitcher and round of shots out of a bar that followed and banted with us on twitter, who we also, might I add, brought a birthday cake to. This is the sort of thing that would NOT have happened had the two of us not merged our powers and done an ultimate twitter goof and committed to the bit. Stunts of this sort are definitely something I’m going to miss, you know, just being able to do stupid weird things with a buddy who “gets it”. 

Yo real talk, now that Kevan has left I straight miss him. Like, if it weren’t for him being around, there’s a lot I just wouldn’t have done over the past few months, I would’ve missed out on a whole adventure with a dude who was just down for whatever literally all the time. Yo bit of insider information regarding BobbyBroccoli right here, but this dude operates on NO sleep. Like, he was living out on the west island, so like an hour minimum between where he was to the centre-ville just because of how buses and trains work, but like, we’d call it a night at like 11:30 on weekdays sometimes and he’d somehow manage to be rested enough to work the next day at 9 even though he got home well passed midnight and probably stayed up watching youtube videos. Fam this dude is NUTS!

Now that he’s gone I’m pretty spooked that I’m gonna get losted me. I got a taste of that fun life I missed out in exchange for good grades over my 4 years of uni, and now I kind of regret missing out on it. Sure, a report card is worth something, but memories and experiences are worth more. Like, the way I look at it, it’s statistically impossible for me to ever click with a dude like Kevan ever again, unless there’s another spongebob game reviewing youtube engineering student living in the montreal area that I’m unaware of, and so I know in all future cases I’m gonna have to work my bum bum off to click at the level with any pals again, like, what Kevan and I had was just pure mother nature fam, you get what I’m saying?

Like, look, if I had to pick a gaming highlight of 2017, it’d be BobbyBroccoli. I had more fun with this dude than I did with any games I’d played, and I want to have more life experiences like that moving forward, I think that’s like the 4th time I’ve said that so maybe now’s about as good of a time as any to wrap up.

Kevan, I love you dude, I miss you dude, have a great year, good luck with your courses bruh. And fam, please go check out Kevan’s channel. I don’t want to spoil anything cause naming him game of the year is gonna be a surprise to him, but he has a video coming out very soon that’s very special and that I think you’ll really like, so go check him out and stay tuned for it unless it's already out, in which case, go check it duuuuude! And remember, commit to the bit y’all.





Anyways, 2017 was a great year full of guud times, guud laughs, guud loves, excellent games, excellent life experiences, and with that being said and with you all as my witnesses, I’d like to officially welcome you to the future of gaming.

For the record, I wrote that outro that ended with “the future of gaming” and just said aaaaww whatever, I’ll just throw something random on screen or something, whatever.



Metal Gear Solid V

Hello and finally, welcome to Metal Gear Solid 5: The Phantom Pain.

Metal Gear Solid, one of my favorite series of games, and now we get to take a look at the concluding title. How do you start this off haha? Actually, wait, how do you start this? Like how do you start recording footage for this game?

I mean, I need to start the game fresh like I always do, but hold up, the game doesn’t give you multiple save files. I’m on PS4, so what’re my options. Well I’ve only got two. The first is I could delete my save. Ha, ha, ha. So my only other option is to create a new Playstation network account and play it there. Well, there’s a couple of problems with that.

First, my Playstation plus subscription, you know, the crap you pay every year that allows you to play games that you’ve already paid for online? Yeah, that thing, it’s only valid on one account, so that’s crap. But more importantly, shortly after launching the game, Konami announced to everyone that there was a bug on Playstation where playing the game across multiple accounts could actually corrupt your save data, and after researching, I wasn’t able to find an official statement mentioning that the bug was fixed. So, I can’t restart the game without risk, and this is a risk I’m not willing to take.

The story of Metal Gear Solid 5 is about loss. I’m not just talking about the plot of the game, I’m talking also about it’s story, how the game came to be the way it is, all of the things that went extremely right and extremely wrong.

Something some people are a little bit sensitive about is the idea that purchasing a game entitles you to all of its content. Mathewmatosis once talked about this in the context of Mario games that offer troubled players methods of skipping difficult sections easily. I’m not sure where I stand here, but what I think we can all agree on is that the minimum we should be able to expect from any game is the ability to experience it new easily and without consequence or risk. Whether it’s giving the player multiple save files for them to play on, allowing them to replay missions at any time, or even just having a gallery of cutscenes after you beat it, every game must allow the player to restart it, to trigger previously experienced segments.

Because of this issue though, Metal Gear Solid being un-restartable, a whole ton of its content is lost. See this dog here? Well I rescued him as a puppy and he used to walk around the base barking like crazy, it was really funny. But, I won’t ever be able to show that to you. See this hangar here? Well this is where Huey used to work until he got kicked off the base, but now it’s just empty, and I’ll never see him around ever again. Oh, the roof of the R&D building, we used to have a giant robot standing up here, but Eli stole it and now it’s gone, I guess you won’t be able to see how cool it looked.

The game is huge, and yeah, all of the missions are replayable, but a lot of what makes Metal Gear Solid V so cool is what happens outside of the fighting. Watching your base grow from this single platform to a huge stronghold is awesome, that part where the epidemic is spreading across your base and you have to diagnose your soldiers and quarantine the sick ones, that’s incredible, so it’s really unfortunate that I’ll never be able to experience them again.

And I don’t want to talk about it too much, but the lost content isn’t just stuff that’s on the disc which is inaccessible, but stuff that never even made it. Yes, they cut the ending from the game. I mean, there’s no other way to say it. They tried to pass it off like they just removed that segment because it didn’t fit in well, but it’s clear that this isn’t the case. This is a Kojima game, some kid, a young clone of Big Boss steals a metal gear and runs away, the game needs to end with you fighting him. This was cut to reduce cost and save time, anything else you hear I can almost guarantee is a lie. Despite how incredible the game plays, you can feel the awful environment was for the developers before they were all let go. Some core aspects of the game clearly built earlier have a great deal of polish, while other features, you can tell, were rushed. It’s a real shame, because as far as games go, Metal Gear Solid 5 could have well been one of the greatest of all time. There was so much vision and passion going into this project, and it didn’t fail because of infeasibility, this thing was certainly feasible, especially by that team. It failed rather because the amount of available effort, measured in person hours, was cut halfway through development, and the time that was spent by devs was probably mostly spent worrying about job security. It’s just, it’s a real disappointment.

So, what can I talk about? What can I show you? Well, let’s talk about the game.

Metal Gear Solid 5 is an open world immersive simulator, what that means is that the game is composed of a large set of systems that the player can play with. Gameplay scenarios like missions don’t need to be designed with as much attention to detail or complexity. Unlike a typical game which may have many level designers, what you’ll see a lot in these sorts of games are people called system designers, system engineers, programmers, or developers.

What’s a system? Well, everything’s a system. Enemy AI is a system, vehicles are a system, various buddies are systems. Someone’s tasked with handling grenades, well, they first have to develop an explosion system if one doesn’t already exist. He’s gotta handle the effects, do stuff like distort the screen and sound if the player was close to the explosion, along with tons of other things. Then the great part is how all of these isolated, separate systems are able to interact with one another. Someone built a destructible environment system, that’s cool. Then the guy who handled the explosion system earlier makes it so that explosions break things. Similarly, the vehicle system guy might make it possible for cars to bust things when they drive into them. And hey, what happens when a car sustains too much damage? Well it’s gotta explode right? Well let’s use some of that explosion system over here too.

That’s why this genre is called a simulator. The game isn’t designed so thoroughly, instead, all of the systems and their influence over each other are.
This leads us to Problem #1: No Metal Gear Solid game has ever done this before. Sure you have a similar system of gameplay, there’s stealth, there’s shooting, there’s fighting, but this is a whole different genre. None of the games before were open world, they were all extremely linear. Systems didn’t always exist, sometimes you had items or features that served only a single purpose for one part of the game. They tried doing some system stuff in MGS3 where you could sabotage the guards by taking out their communications, food or ammunition, but I’m pretty sure there were only 4 areas like that, and let’s be honest, blowing up the food shed is not something people ever talk about when discussing MGS3.

So right away, gameplay wise, this game is a major departure from the games that made the series famous. It’s also not necessarily an improvement, because like I said, it’s just a whole different thing, that doesn’t automatically make it better, you know? If they had just taken the old adventure game format and tried to improve it, that would have been one thing, but this game tackles some pretty different features using a whole different style, a style that, looking at the previous games, one wouldn’t be able to assume that the fans of would be so happy about. People came to this series because they like long, story driven, linear stealth action adventure games full of gimmicks and jokes, so let’s give them an open world, serious immersive sim with about 2 lines of dialogue, they’ll love that!

I’ve actually been replaying the first Metal Gear Solid with my sister who’s never played it, and getting back into it really helped remind me why I fell in love with these games in the first place, but also made me sad to see how this latest game barely shares anything in common with it. Like, look, if you can, go replay the first couple of parts of that game, just, like, use the codec to call people and stuff, mess around, get a feel for it, you’ll remember how it’s supposed to be. That game engages you so deeply, while MGS5 feels so shallow sometimes. And that’s not to say all open world immersive sims are shallow, actually that’s normally not the case.

What I’m trying to say I guess is that Metal Gear Solid was, at one point, inarguably, THE BEST game of it’s genre, a genre that it basically defined by combining so many different things together. But now, it’s not the best of it’s genre, it’s just another open world type game, and it’s not really even the best at most of the things it does. Metal Gear used to be a game that stood on it’s own, there was nothing to compare it to, but by adopting this new genre, now there is, and that sucks.

Look, nobody’s gonna buy this new Metal Gear game because it’s open world, they’re going to buy it because it’s a Metal Gear game. Problem is, it’s not, and that’s disappointing.

I mean, the game doesn’t even have real Boss Fights! Real, gimmicky boss fights! Talk to any gamer, whether or not they’ve actually played Metal Gear before or not and ask them what they know about it. Guaranteed they’ll either tell you about the fight in metal gear solid 1 where you have to unplug your freaking controler to confuse a psychic guy, or they’ll mention the legendary sniper battle from metal gear solid 3 and how there’s a secret way to beat it.

So you’ll have these people coming into this game now expecting these sorts of things, expecting to have their minds blown, but nope, all you’ve got here is a stupid chicken hat.

It almost feels unfair to judge a game by it’s previous installments, but you have to for something like this. I hate to say it, but this is borderline false advertising. Half the game’s freaking exposure isn’t paid for by marketing, it’s just the fact that it’s a new Metal Gear Solid game, but really it’s not, and I feel like it’s almost unfair not to explain that to consumers, you know?

Now you might ask, how come people didn’t complain when Ground Zeroes came out? Wasn’t that the point of it anyways? That is a very good question, but we’ll talk about that later. Because first, we’re not done with systems.

So like we were saying, what makes immersive sims so cool is how many systems they have and how they all interact with one another. Now of course, there are always things players will do that developers never expected, and yeah, in those cases, it makes sense that the game might behave a little weird. Who could have ever expected someone to put a bunch of inflatable decoys in the back of a truck, strap a bunch of explosives to it, and then drive it into the middle of an enemy base? No one, that’s who. Still, all of the systems do their best to give the crazy whacked out player their desired outcome. The AI system, decoy system, vehicle system and explosion system all work together here to lure all of the guards around the truck to investigate, only to have them fall for the trap. It’s great.

What sucks though is when the player does things that logically do make sense, that should have been anticipated by the system designers, but discovers that they were not implemented. This is especially awful when the thing the player is trying to do is something that would have had an effect in previous games. That’s right, I’m comparing it to an older game, I am invulnerable to your criticisms MGS fan community, of which I am a part of.

So Metal Gear Solid 4 had a really great opening segment with a really good tutorial. It was kind of mix between a visual and tactile tutorial, meaning that some of the features of the game were explained to the player by playing the game and were never directly explained to them. One of the first buildings you enter is this one, it’s got a couple of long hallways and a bunch of small rooms. As soon as you go in, an enemy patrol does too. You’ve got no silenced weapons and there’s a couple of tanks outside, so shooting these guys is a no go. Instead, you decide to try to hide in one of the many corners, but all around these great hiding spots are bottles and cans, and the sound made when walking into them is detected by the guards, causing them to come over and investigate.

So when walking around in MGSV and noticing a bunch of different items could be bumped around, I immediately recalled this tutorial segment in the previous game and exercised extreme caution. This effect lasted until once when I was in a base and wanted to make a sound to lure a guard in where I could take them out. Rather than using the spinning hand thing, I saw some junk on the ground and purposefully walked into it, then was surprised to see that it had no effect. For some reason, the sound system doesn’t mingle so well with the AI and guard systems like it should.

For example, the expected behavior is how it works with the weapon system. When the player makes a loud noise with one of their weapons, depending on the sound, guards will be alerted or become suspicious. So if you fire your gun un-suppressed, everyone on base will be on high-alert, whereas if you throw a decoy or empty magazine, guards close by will hear the sound and move to investigate. So while this sound does attract guards, this sound doesn’t. And believe it or not, neither does this one. That’s right, the sound made when breaking a glass window by jumping through it doesn’t alert anyone. But, you know, guards can hear your footsteps if you’re crawling too close behind them. These trained soldiers have worse selective hearing than teenagers, it’s ridiculous. And that’s not all, there’s tons of inconsistencies when it comes to which sounds do attract guards and which sounds don’t.

Like, okay, you know Quiet? Remember how the first time you meet her you get into a sniper battle with her and it’s super hard? Well one of the best ways to track her position was when she moved, because when the runs, she leaves these huge piles of dust behind her and makes these explosion like sounds. So later she becomes your partner and you can go out on missions with her, but for some reason, none of the guards seems to notice the freaking sound barrier being broken multiple times in succession all around the base when she moves. It’s kind of ridiculous.

I thought at first using Quiet on missions would be a sort of compromise. Like, her movement and sounds would raise the suspicion of the whole base, but her powers as a superhuman sniper would make up for it. But nope, instead you get all the benefits with no downside. Oh, but of course, when she fires on enemies, even when she’s using a suppressor, they can pin-point her location. I mean jeeze, you want one word that describes how the systems in this system-based game work? Inconsistently. That’s the word, and when it comes to the rules of a game, that’s a really really bad word.

“The way the game plays feels very inconsistent”.
“As an MGS fan, I think MGSV is really inconsistent”.

And of course, this isn’t the only system that doesn’t work so well with the guard AI. You’ve certainly seen the memes about this one. So you’ve got two animal companions, one’s a dog and one’s a horse. When they got spotted by the enemy, they just get shoed away, because, well, they’re just plain old animals. So when they’re not just plain old animals, when they’re all decked out in armor and equipment, wouldn’t you think that would raise an eyebrow? Well, yeah, of course. A dog in a bomb defusal suit isn’t an everyday sighting, clearly someone’s up to no good in the base, right? Wrong! The AI system has no consideration for the animal’s equipment, and treats them as if they were a normal old horse or whatever, even though the freaking icon of the my army is right there, right there on the horse. This horse is basically a billboard advertising my infiltration of your base, and you couldn’t give half a crap. Dang man.

I mean, back to MGS4 or even MGS3, both of those games had segments where enemies behaved differently around you depending on the costume you were wearing. If you wore the rebel soldier disguise, the rebel soldiers would assume you were one of them. That was so cool.

Again, as an MGS veteran, I made an assumption about how the feature would work. I noticed in the field that my naked animals wouldn’t cause the guards to raise the alarm, and then logically assumed that all dressed versions definitely would alert them to my presence.

These sort of things are huge immersion breakers and 1) we’re just scratching the surface of them, and 2) I’m not the only one who’s encountered or complained about them, which generally is the case for these sorts of obscure problems. What’s awful though is that because of the style and format of the game, you can play for hours and hours acting under these false assumptions, wasting tons of time being extra cautious trying not to run into crap on the ground or equipping your partners with the minimal gear, only to find out accidentally that you’ve been wrong the whole time. The conclusion you drew either logically or from your mental model of a Metal Gear Solid game was wrong, and it’s frustrating to know that you’ve been wasting your time and that you put too much trust into the game, the game hasn’t met your expectations, your very realistic expectations, even though for a long time it tricked you into thinking it did.

There is no excuse for these sorts of miscommunications or lack of communication between systems.

For the sound issue, I’m pretty sure it’s all this guy’s fault. Stealth games always need to be careful when including partners because of course the player doesn’t want to pay the price of their partner’s mistakes. If you remember correctly, in The Last of Us, they solved this issue by making your partners functionally invisible to the enemy AI. Again, very poorly made and immersion breaking, though rarer than the situations in MGSV. Here though, what it seems is that rather than just making all of the dog’s actions undetectable by the guards, like if the dog runs over some stuff or knocks over a bottle, the guards won’t hear it, what they did instead was remove all of the effects of anything the dog could do accidentally. Oh crap the dog can make too much noise and alert guards to the player? Crap, we’re getting bad playtester scores. Well, let’s just cut out sound all together, that’ll solve it! In any other AAA developer, this would have never flown, but here’s the catch.

SOFTWARE ENGINEERING ALERT!

Conway’s Law is one of the most important laws of software engineering, especially when it comes to large project teams like those found in games companies.

It reads: “organizations which design systems […] are constrained to produce designs which are copies of the communication structures of these organizations”

What that basically means is that a software’s architecture will reflect the organization’s architecture. If two very separate teams are working on two components for a single product, you can bet that these components will have pretty poor visibility of each other and will have very cohesive responsibilities, which is great if that’s what you’re going for.

But when your product is an immersive simulator with tons of interconnected systems, any organizational problems you have will be reflected in the interchanges, or lack of interchanges, between the various systems.

And what do we know about the environment at konami during development of the game? Oh yeah…

But we can see even better cases of Conway’s in action here. Anyone who’s played the game can probably tell you how awful all of the vehicles are. Like, they all suck. There’s this weird thing where you can actually build up velocity by colliding with things, so driving in the car or the tanks feels really slippery, and don’t even get me started on the walker, ugh…

And why is it like this? Well according to the credits of the game, there was just one guy responsible for programming vehicles, and he doesn’t have any other programming credits, so, like, that’s it. The whole vehicle team was one man. I mean, sure he probably had a supervisor, but given the working environment, I doubt anyone really cared about any of the work they were doing. The vehicle guy had no one else on his team to talk to, no one to review his stuff, and probably very poor communication with anyone else. And that’s why the vehicle system is so whacked and works pretty strangely with other systems sometimes… (car driving into turret).


Now, aside from the systems having issues working together and the genre not being what anyone expected, neither was the setting. I’m not sure who said this, I spent a good hour trying to find the source but I couldn't. I think it might have been SuperBunnyHop, but I’m not sure, anyways. Someone said something along the lines of, you know, what kid growing up, glued to their screen playing Metal Gear Solid 1 said to themself “I can’t wait until the next game when we’re walking around the desert aimlessly for hours doing nothing”.

Metal Gear Solid 1 took place entirely within the confines of a single military base. Metal Gear Solid 2, similarly, took place indoors but included more verticality and a couple of new stealth tricks. Indoor stealth is really cool, and these games nailed it. Metal Gear Solid 3 introduced jungle and forest elements, but also had many indoor bases to infiltrate. Metal Gear Solid 4 included both, but also had urban city environments and active war zones to sneak through. I mean remember that part in Vista Mansion? That was awesome. Each game added upon the previous is a fashion that made sense. You went from hugging corners for cover to crawling through heated battlefields in camouflage trying to decide if you should pick a side and help them or just stay out of their radars.

Metal Gear Solid 5, disappointingly, features almost exclusively outdoor stealth. Everything’s about hiding in short bushes, staying behind rocks, or just keeping distance from enemies. Hugging corners and popping out to CQC someone down is now less effective than just staying really far away and taking guys out with a sniper rifle. Some people I know fell into a similar situation as me. Even though the game’s AI system reacts to a lot of your strategies, one it doesn’t consider is sniping. Taking the dog out to spot all the enemies for you and then just tranquing them all with a rifle is an infallible tactic, and once you discover it, it becomes hard to play the game any other way. I had to come up with all sorts of personal challenges for myself when playing to avoid abusing this boring and lame playstyle.

Now, there are a couple of indoor areas throughout the game, and I’m not talking those little tents or shacks you walk into and take supplies from or those little shacks that’re good for nothing more that storing bodies. The thing is though, of all the buildings throughout the entire game, there’s only one self-contained one, and that’s the mansion in africa. What I mean by that is that, well, it’s closed off to the rest of the area. I mean, the building in the airport is pretty big, but it has these huge windows, and so any threats to you while you’re in the building likely come from outside rather than in. This place though has very few access points which makes it very interesting. Throughout the entire game, this was the only place I remember actually having difficulty entering, and it was refreshing. Every other base you ride up to somehow, then get low and crawl to the first cover you see, and that’s it. Pffft. This one, first you have to get passed this huge jungle, then you have to make it to the main compound, then you’ve gotta find an entrance and sneak in, do whatever you came there to do, all the while watching out for enemies inside, and finally, you’ve gotta sneak out and make your way to an evacuation point.

Getting in and out of this building is the only thing in this game that felt like Metal Gear Solid and felt like an intrusion mission.

But this isn’t perfect, because once you actually get in, something really weird happens. You see, as 99% of the game takes place out in the open air, the camera was placed waaaay far back to give you a good view. Once you go inside, rather than use a new camera or something, the field of view changes, giving the player a weird zoomed in distorted view. Being inside is when you need the camera the most, and suddenly you can’t see anything. You’re view is way too close to the character, he’s obscuring a good portion of the screen and it makes it really hard to operate properly. Sure, I get it, it’s cool and stlyish, it shows that you’re in a different place, but none of the other games did that, and they worked just fine.

It’s just a little upsetting to see how little attention was given to the couple of indoor sections in the game, how the one remaining element from the original Metal Gear Solid was almost forgotten and was treated like crap. Indoor sneaking is so much cooler than outdoor sneaking, especially when all it takes to do perfect ghost stealth in the plains is to lay down and crawl to your destination.

Metal Gear Solid 5 isn’t about looking for hiding spots and staying out of the enemy's line of sight anymore, it’s about challenging your patience by asking you to crawl a whole long distance and fight the urge to press the X button and stand up to move faster and inevitably get spotted by the enemy.


Like I said, MGSV is really good at what it does right, and we’ll talk about that later, but one of the things it doesn’t do is try to be a Metal Gear Solid game, and that’s disappointing.


Ground Zeroes and Requirements


So here’s where things get weird.

As some of you may know, Metal Gear Solid 5 The Phantom Pain isn’t the only part of the Metal Gear Solid 5 Experience, there’s also a short game by the name of Metal Gear Solid 5 Ground Zeroes which came out over a year earlier. Ground Zeroes was called a demo and a waste of money by many, but not everyone understood its true purpose.

You see, when it comes to software development processes, one of the most critical steps is requirements gathering. People seem to have these weird unrealistic concepts of how these sorts of projects work. You don’t just come up with an idea and start clack clack clacking on a keyboard, that’s not it at all. Before you implement anything, you need to find out what your product needs to be able to do, these are requirements. Requirements are elicited and gathered from all manner of stakeholder and then documented formally, normally using things called User Stories or Use Cases. Then after giving each requirement a relative scale and doing some other planning activities, for every iteration of development, a select few are chosen and completed. Once requirements are implemented, the same User Stories or Use Cases can be used as high level test cases, because Requirements Verification, or checking to make sure that your code actually meets the requirements properly, is extremely important. Once you’ve checked off every test case, your product is complete and you move into the maintenance phase. Now of course games have a bit more creativity thrown into them, but this is the idea.

The thing with game projects though is that normally the requirements are collected all wrong, and fixing requirements related issues during later iterations of development can be upwards of 800% more costly than it would have been during, well, the requirements phase. You’ve really gotta have a plan for what you’re doing.

Requirements for games are typically gathered by reading through a game design document produced by a game designer. This means that the designer is pretty much considered the only stakeholder, the software produced is only going to meet the requirements he specifies. This is completely wrong to do though. The designers and developers are stakeholders, yes, but they’re secondary stakeholders, their only desires is for this game to look really good on their linkedin profiles.

The primary stakeholders of any game are its users. These are the people who are going to use the game, and most importantly, spend money on the game. So how come users are barely ever involved in the requirements gathering phase? I mean yes, companies do have playtesting sessions with everyday people, but these are normally done when the game has either a BETA build or is getting ready for Certification. At this point, if a critical issue is found by users, say the gameplay is not fun and it doesn’t meet users’ requirements, it’s too late to affordably fix it, and so the managers have one of two options: either release the game that people don’t like, or go over budget to fix this issue, an issue that wouldn’t have cost so much if it were spotted earlier.

I mean, how many games have you heard of that needed to be changed up after poor playtesting results? And more importantly, how many haven’t you heard of.

Now of course, games aren’t just software, they’re entertainment, so involving users is complicated and does have some downsides.

Take the new Final Fantasy game that’s coming out for example. Every couple of months there’s new gameplay or tech demos to show off, and every time they gather people’s feedback and show something better the next time. That’s cool and all, but now there’s little surprise once the game finally comes out. Involving everyone in it’s development takes a lot of the mystery and charm out of it.

There are obviously, depending on the situation, very good ways to do this, for example last time we talked about Splatoon where the developer’s played other games of the same genre, identified their issues, and tried their best to address them in their game, indirectly meeting user requirements.

When it comes to a series like Metal Gear Solid, you could imagine it’d be easy just to gather requirements from popular criticisms of the previous games. Not every series has the opportunity to do that. Though this time they couldn’t actually do this because they were shifting genres. Instead, they would have to observe other games, pick common features that could fit into Metal Gear, and then come up with their own ideas, ideas they thought users would like. While they’re not getting them from users directly, designers with this much experience can most often be expected to know what the users want.

So that’s what they did, they came with as many of their own ideas as possible and started building a game.

There’s one part of the requirements process I left out though, and that’s Requirements Validation. Once you have your requirements, you have to validate them, you have to make sure they’re the correct ones. Involving users in elicitation might be challenging, but getting them to play a role in validation is much simpler. Then, if the requirements are either invalid or incomplete, fixes can be made as early and as inexpensively as possible.

And that’s what I think Ground Zeroes was, it was a deliverable, a small working version of the total product delivered to we, the stakeholders, in order to have us validate the requirements they came up with and hopefully generate our own.

Now, I don’t want to waste time on this, but I was actually working on a project specifically about this subject for a while, I even had a professor from school interested in helping me. Long story short, I was in contact with a bunch of different kinds of developers I found from Kojima Productions LA and I had started to conduct interviews, but then shortly after that was when, as you probably know, their studio was closed and they were all let go. After that they couldn’t talk to me anymore. It was pretty bad luck for me, it was kind of cool though actually, I had found out about the shut down a whole day before anyone else outside of Konami did, it was crazy. I stopped trying for a while, though eventually I did get back to trying to reach out to people, people from the new KojiPro, some journalists from YouTube, I even met someone from Konami’s HR department, but no one had any connections to anyone who could answer any of my questions or validate anything I’m about to say.

So, the evidence we do have does make this theory pretty believable, but keep in mind, I wasn’t able to get anyone to confirm that it’s true.

What we saw happen after Ground Zeroes release was a lot of responses to fan comments and concerns, and we even saw the development of a couple of new features.

For example, one of the smaller issues a lot of people had with Ground Zeroes was the lack of expected functionality of dumpsters. In previous Metal Gear Solid games, you could hide yourself or neutralized enemies in various containers to keep them out of sight. In this game though, even though there were dumpsters all over the place, they didn’t function like this at all.

Pause

The next gameplay demo video of MGSV that was shown to the public began with the player hiding in a dumpster.

There’s a much more important example though.

You see, one of the requirements of the game director himself was to have the game be a lot more serious and realistic. He wanted less weird stuff and jokes in the game, and one of the things he mentioned would be left out as he thought it would conflict with the game’s serious tone, was the classic cardboard box item. The cardboard box was an item that had appeared in every metal gear solid game, allowing the player to hide in it or use it to fast-travel.

Excluding it was something Kojima really stuck to. He mentioned at one point that it would return in the Phantom Pain, but not in the same goofy way as in previous games. Basically what he was implying was that you wouldn’t see boxes with little legs sticking out anymore.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T1m2WluChyU
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQZfyKjcCO4

Fans were really disappointed. The cardboard box was a staple of the franchise, and to imagine it gone was difficult.

Pause

In the next gameplay demo, the same one that saw the return of dumpsters, a goofier than ever cardboard box was shown, and people were very happy.

There was a conflict in requirements, the users wanted something different than the developers, and unlike other games where designers trump all, they actually took into consideration the opinions of the users, the primary stakeholders.

I’m pretty sure that up until that point, the box didn’t exist. I mean, the box does seem pretty out of place and shows signs of having been developed very quickly and later. For instance, unlike previous games, the main characters never really acknowledge the box item in conversations, meaning it was probably made after all of the stars did their voice recording. Also, the main threat cardboard boxes were made to defend against, surveillance cameras, only appear in I think 2 areas in the entire game? And just, some of the box related animations seem to have a lot less polish than other things.

Like I said, I’m not sure if this is true at all. Hey, maybe they were lying, maybe boxes were always a part of the game. But what it looks like is that Ground Zeroes was a requirements validation tactic, a way to get the primary stakeholders of the system, the players themselves, to play an early deliverable version of the software and provide feedback on it, both grading the implemented features and requesting additional ones or changes, giving the team a better chance to make the game everyone wanted as early as possible.

And that’s really freaking cool. Say what you will about how much Ground Zeroes cost, but it was about taking requirements, THE SINGLE MOST IMPORTANT ASPECT OF SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, yet somehow a consistently missing part of game development processes, back into consideration. This is one of the few games where user feedback caused game designers to look back on their choices and realize they were wrong, the players put the devs in their place, showed them that the customer is always right, and that there had better be cardboard freaking boxes in the last Metal Gear Solid.


How Ground Zeroes was good

Now, here’s where things get tricky. Reception to the actual content of Ground Zeroes, aside from those couple of little issues people had, was excellent. Everyone loved the game, long-time fans and newcomers alike.

So how come MGSV fell a little bit flat? Shouldn’t the players have been able to detect those issues in Ground Zeroes and let the developers know so they could fix them before launch?

Nope, because a lot of the issues had with The Phantom Pain were things that Ground Zeroes didn’t allow people to experience, and I guarantee you if they had, people would have complained.

Let me explain to you the format of Ground Zeroes. This game game was basically a small collection of missions that all took place in a single area, Camp Omega. Each Mission was completely unique. Time of day, weather, objectives, time constraints, guard placement, surveillance camera placements, entry points, everything was different. They were trying to show how a single area could be reused in so many ways. Each mission caused you to look at the base in a whole different light. There was the main one where you have to rescue two prisoners, one in an outdoor cell and the other in the basement of the heavily guarded base. This one could be done slowly and carefully. But then there was the mission where you had to assassinate two high value targets on opposite ends of the base using extreme stealth because if anyone spots you, they’ll flee the area.

This idea felt like traditional metal gear solid stuff, it felt like what I was trying to explain before, like the took the concepts from previous games and just elevated them, improved them in every way.

Camp Omega was huge, and every objective could be tackled so many different ways. That’s what open world stealth should be like.


But the reason Ground Zeroes was like this wasn’t because the final game would be like this and they were trying to prepare the players for it, it was because they didn’t have enough effort to spend making multiple areas for this little demo. What they were really trying to demonstrate was all of the different mission types and graphical and environmental effects. Nobody realized that though, and so everyone thought that this property of the base in Ground Zeroes would carry over to the phantom pain, that every area of the much larger open-world maps would be just as important and serve just as many different roles as the single small base in the demo. Our expectations were accidentally raised, and when the game finally came out, it felt so empty compared to what we were expecting.

MGSV falling flat

Unlike Ground Zeroes, most bases in the game were used for just a single unique mission. This is probably the single most disappointing this about the Phantom Pain. Each enemy compound, even the huge ones, you check it out once, do whatever the objective is, leave, and then you never really have to go back. I mean, I think the mansion area you need to go back to once after the Code Talker Mission to rescue an intel agent, and the airport you might have to revisit during the mission where you have to take down an armored unit, depending on how fast you are, and you also might go back for the skulls mission if you’re really quick, but that’s all I can think of.

All of these really cool unique locations are so underused, it’s really crappy.

One of the huge bases, OKB0, the one at the end of the Afghanistan map is the only one even slightly comparable in complexity to Camp Omega, and even that sucks. After doing the one mission with it, I’d go back because I thought the place was really cool, but outside of the context of that mission, the base is kind of broken. The place only has one entry point which is the front area, and the whole idea is that you have to get all the way to the end where the helicopter thing is which triggers a cutscene. But, when you’re not doing that mission, just sneaking in and making it all the way to the end doesn’t mean anything. All it means is that whoops, you’ve gotta try to sneak yourself all the way back.

While Camp Omega could hold all sorts of creative and complex missions in a single location, these bases were oftentimes linear, having a single intended route, punishing creativity, and only being used for a single main mission. Like dang you know the honeybee mission? That base is huge and incredibly interesting! It’s a stronghold attached to some mysterious and complex cave system. Sound cool right? But it’s designed specifically for that mission, no other. So of course, you never have to go back there, and even if you do just for fun, it’s not as good without the objective.

Yes, sometimes these bases would host side-ops, but the dull simplicity of side-ops in this game don’t even compare to those in Ground Zeroes or even freaking Peace Walker. Extract the highly skilled soldier? Why? Why is every mission about extracting? There’s no challenge here, the partners can find the guy for you anyways! What about sneak through and kill two guys without being spotted? What about interrogate the mole to find the location of a secret cassette tape? Where’s the creativity!?


In this sense, Ground Zeroes offered more interesting and unique gameplay scenarios than the game it was acting as a demo for. I actually have fonder memories experimenting with systems and strategies in that game than in MGS5, which is really weird.

I mean, you pick. Multiple nonlinear missions and objectives in a single large base, or many missions hosted one-to-one by medium to large bases on a single huge map that you keep having to run between. I mean, I pick Ground Zeroes, it’s much more realistic and immersive. It plays with the player’s mental map of the base, and shows them just how easy it is for the game to challenge them.


Metal Gear Solid 5

So at this point you’re probably thinking I hate this game, I can’t stand Metal Gear Solid 5. I think I’ve done a pretty good job explaining to you why, as a Metal Gear Solid fan, I could be disapointed. The thing is, I have an embarrassingly large amount of hours spent in this game, and it’s important to be fair and critical.

Is this game the best Metal Gear Solid game? No, I don’t think so. I think that title is held by Peace Walker. All anyone really wanted out of this game was a remake of Peace Walker in the new engine anyways, that was pretty clear from the start.

This game diverges so far from what Metal Gear Solid is supposed to be, I would barely even consider it a Metal Gear Solid game anyways. But without that title, how does the game hold up? When the various systems do work together, is it still a good game?

Absolutely.


While it doesn’t innovate in any of the directions you’d expect a Metal Gear game to, and while it’s not the best at any of the things it does, it shows how all sorts of different, seemingly unrelated features can be put together to create a single solid experience.

Action and adventure games, if their story is lacking, are often criticized for being very shallow experiences. To prevent this, Metal Gear Solid 5 couples your progression through the adventure to a base management system. Now there are entire games based around managing a base and developing all sorts of stuff, so Metal Gear uses a simplified, and at times, automated one, to keep the player grounded. You never feel like you don’t know what to do for too long because there’s always work to be done.

Main gameplay influences your base. The better you do on missions, the more soldiers will volunteer to join your ranks. The more equipment your procure, the more money you have to develop your base.

Your base though also influences your gameplay. The greater your men, the higher the quality of weapons and equipment you can produce, or the greater the accuracy of the intel team when it comes to enemy locations, among other things.

So game progression is seen by the player in terms of base growth as well as the unlocking of new story events. 

That’s a really cool idea, and one that no other games has really done as well. Normally a player can just expect to get  more powerful as the game goes on because, well, that’s just how it is. In this game though, you know exactly why you’re getting more powerful, you’re directly responsible for it, it’s not just some system behind the scenes running without your knowledge.

Similarly, a player normally expects a game to increase in difficulty as the story goes on because, well, that’s just how it is. But again, Metal Gear Solid 5 flips this on it’s head. The equipment available to enemies gets better depending on your experience, tactics and weapons, not just randomly. Replaying one of the first missions of the game later on shows you just how well this dynamic difficulty works.

Now again, are the enemies prepared for the classic tranq sniper and dog combo? Absolutely not, and yeah, that kind of breaks the whole difficulty system, but that doesn’t mean it’s not innovative. New things always come with mistakes. Should they have really been risking that with the final title of a beloved series? Probably not, but anyways.

But this combination of adventure game and base elements is really cool. Is it a base management game that you play by completing adventure tasks? Or is it an adventure game that you play by building a stronghold? I don’t know, and that’s what’s awesome. Sometimes it even ties in both of these elements together.

One of my favorite parts of the game had to do with a disease on the base. I can’t really show you footage of it because it only happens once, but whatever. So a bunch of your soldiers are getting sick and you’ve gotta try to prevent the transmission of the disease by quarantining those you suspect of carrying the illness. Suddenly, your base is weak, too many people are sick, this is a story event and it directly influences all of the base systems. And to progress through this part, you have to make use of base management menus, like looking at soldiers and their attributes to look for a possible pattern, then select them for quarantine. This is the only event like this throughout the whole game, but it’s so powerful. You’re not really sure what to do, people are dying and you want to make it through more missions to hopefully find a solution, but playing the game is hard now because your support teams are down. It’s so cool.


Now, are the open world aspects of the game the best ever made? Absolutely not. The world is, for the most part, empty, and you’ll be doing a lot of running back and forth for minutes at a time because you’re probably too cheap to spend money on a car or something, so get used to this sound playing for hours and hours. Compare it to something like GTA where there’s always something to do everywhere, and you can see that no part of this game really needed to be open-world, it seems like it was just done to make it more trendy. I don’t know.

So are the base management aspects the tightest around? No, they’re not. Using these menus can be pretty clunky, and for simplicity’s sake, a lot of things were left out of the player’s control, things that some players actually expressed a desire in being in control of, for example the exact layout of the base. Also just due to a lack of clarity, the exact price and impact of certain equipment or actions were made unclear to the player. This is something a lot of games have trouble with. They give the player tons of really cool tools, but afraid they’ll waste them, the players just stockpile them and instead use less fun weapons to complete their missions. Look, I’ve played the game a lot and I’ve almost never used any of the different strike things. That’s a huge problem, and the game failed to address that.

Well, are immersive sim aspects better than any other game? No, not that either. Like we said before, there were a lot of problems with them. This one though, I think if there were less issues during development and more available effort, could have possibly been true, but alas, nope.

So, is the story excellent? Not really. I mean, compared to other Metal Gears, it’s undoubtedly the weakest. The lack of major voice acting really sucks, especially coming right out of Peace Walker where David Hayter had to record tons and tons of dialogue not just for the story, but also for multiplayer modes and all sorts of other things, this game just really falls flat there. The performances, other than Kaz, jeeze, okay, that guy kills it, but other than him, everyone is kind of lifeless or awkward. The twist at the end, despite getting me, was pretty poorly done. I appreciate and understand it, and as time has gone on, I’ve learned to respect it a little more, I mean, cool, we were Big Boss the whole time, we the players. But, we the players didn’t want this. I mean, this isn’t MGS2, Kojima has already taught us about the dangers of having high expectations, and the fact. Okay, no, wait.

Okay, so the game starts, you do this long tutorial mission, this weird guy teaches you how to do everything, then he disappears and the real game starts. Then at the end of the game, the tutorial missions comes back as the last mission. You go through the whole thing again, but now you find out that this guy was actually the real Big Boss, the guy you thought you were playing as the whole time, and you’re just a body double who was hypnotized into thinking you were him or whatever. You know what, cool, that’s cool, tie the ending of the back to where it started. God of War did that and it was cool. You know what God of War didn’t do though? It didn’t freaking re-teach you what every single button does for no freaking reason! Jeeze! This last mission and reveal could have just been a flashback, but instead you’re forced to re-do a tutorial meant to teach you how the controls work for a game that you are currently playing the FINAL FREAKING MISSION OF! Oh thanks! I have no idea how I beat this game without knowing the controls! Good thing the last level tells me them! Thanks game!

That’s absolute crap, and I think it’s because of that awful, absolutely freaking despicable delivery of the final twist, that people are pretty upset about it. All in all, it’s okay, but it’s nothing to write home about, and it’s not what anyone wanted.

So, Metal Gear Solid 5 isn’t the best at any of the things it does, but what makes it unique is that it’s probably the only game that does all of the things it does. Technically, it’s an open-world immersive sim with base management aspects, that’s pretty cool.

On its own, it’s not the best game game, it’s not a really really great game, but it’s a pretty good game. I don’t think it’s going to have as much of an influence on the gaming scene as the previous Metal Gear Solid games did, but I think it’s going to open people’s eyes as to how separate elements can be combined to build a cohesive experience.



Now before we send off, I wanna give some advice. If you share any of the same sentiments about the game as me, here’s what I’d recommend, this is what I did to spice the game back up for myself.

The difficulty system is broken, and there are many strategies and loadouts that the enemy is never prepared for. Instead of getting stuck relying on these, force yourself out of your comfort zone. Purposefully take unsuppressed weapons with you, only use the horse as a partner,  randomly select your gear, take a gadget you’ve never used before, like claymore mines or something, and try to build a whole strategy around that. Just, prevent yourself from abusing a certain type of play. And don’t be afraid to call in support. Try to use a tank to complete missions, call in sleeping gas strikes, change the weather, there’s so much you can do that you’ll miss out on if you allow yourself to.

Also, be sure to check out the secondary objectives for missions. Some of them are really poorly made, like the broken conversation listening ones, but others are pretty fun, they change missions up a little bit. It’s not as great as ground zeroe’s fully alternate missions because in the end you still need to do whatever the main objective is, but completing these side goals makes it feel as much like Ground Zeroes as possible.

There’s a lot to do in the game, so only do what’s worth your while. I think dropping down in one area of the map and planning a route that connects a bunch of different side ops or main ops is a lot of fun, especially when you’re doing it with unfamiliar equipment and tactics. Or hey, take no weapons! Well, you can’t actually, which sucks, but try to play where you procure all weapons on site, that’s tons of fun.

Conclusion

So that’s it. Metal Gear Solid 5 is an interesting game with a couple of seriously broken features that prevent it from being considered great. There are good ways to have fun with it, but you may have to design gameplay scenarios yourself, which is a little crappy. The idea behind it was great, and with some more effort and polish, it definitely could have been a lot better. It was a disappointment as far as a Metal Gear Solid title goes, and I don’t think people are going to talk about it in the future as much as they still talk about the original games, partly because the game isn’t so innovative, and partly because you can’t even properly restart it, which is a shame, but hey, Ground Zeroes is pretty fun haha!

Thanks for watching!


Habendaz

Computers are kind of amazing. They can help us remember things, help us do things, like homework, help us solve problems and fix mistakes, help us find problems and mistakes to solve and fix. They run the delivery services that carry our cheeseburgers to us, the airplanes that carry us to new adventures, the communications systems that carry our voices and project our agency around the world. They learn our interests and recommend us things. They tell us when to sleep, when to wake up. We can discover new things with them, we can discover new places and people and activities with them.

We can play games! They can simulate these complex worlds with complex sets of rules and we can achieve goals within them. We can go on quests, complete challenges, suffer and triumph. We can absorb ourselves computationally driven narratives that accept our own unique expression, our styles, our ideas and decisions. We can be one against the world, all odds stacked against us, or we can be just one of a team. Our experiences can broad and deep and solitary and collaborative, all because of these incredible pieces of technology.

And how lucky are we to be the first ones to grow up with this? There’s this song by Eiffel 65 that came out almost 2 decades ago now called People Of Tomorrow, evidently written by people less cynical who looked forward to the impacts of technology on future people.

“Today you’re walking off to school,
With your game boy
But tomorrow you will lead the way.
Computer kids,
Born in the world of PC
Communications,
And the world is what you are and to become.”

[a theme of technological determinism can be read here. The Eiffel boys, clearly technocrats if you’ve listened to some of there other songs, most notably “Deep Down”, these guys here are saying that the world is changing and that we, the kids in their time, their “People of Tomorrow” will become it, we are it. We are, as the song continues, the “CPU Generation”, the “Nation”, we are the “future world”.]


This is a very hopeful and excited view of the world from a group of italian dudes who had first-hand experience in having computers change their lives, a perspective you typically don’t see in people their age, in the people of yesterday.

Computers are kind of amazing. They’ve fundamentally changed the world, and if you share the same view as these dudes then you’d credit them for the society we live in today. There is so much we can do today with these machines.

But the question reads: what can’t computers do?

INTRO to the game



When I was a kid, I was one of the unlucky bois who’s family arrangement meant I couldn’t leave school at the bell on the bus. School ended at 4 and my mother, who worked, wouldn’t be home by then. Instead, I needed to stay later at daycare only to be picked up around 5 to 6:30 on the latest nights. They’d give me and the other kids in the same boat a short hour long session to get a start on homework, but afterwards as the parents started arriving, they’d kind of sit us all down in the music room which made it easier for them to keep an eye on us and gave us a bunch of room to play.

The shelves lining the walls of the room were filled with toys and games, so bored with nothing else to do, we’d try them all out and figure out how to play. That’s when we discovered a very special red box, a weird looking game with a weird cover, its title written in a goofy font which I think may have contributed, in addition to our short attention spans and the fact that we probably spent no more than a glace trying to read it and that we were taught to read and write in french before english, eeeh anyways I think somehow all of these factors contributed to us totally misreading it and never correcting ourselves. At least, that’s the closest to an answer I can give, the best I’ll probably ever be able to reason as to why, to us, this special game in this weird looking red box was called Habendaz.








Now, to anyone watching, it’s very clear that this game is not called Habendaz. It’s Hedbanz, the identity crisis game, the game where you strap on a dumb looking plastic headband and place a card on it without looking, then compete to see who can guess the subject of their card by asking yes or no questions to the rest of the group in turns. It’s a really fun social game, you’ve probably played it at a party or two because it’s easy to understand, its accessible, there aren’t any complex rules to try to explain, it’s great.

And you know what? Had we figured out how it was meant to be played, we probably would have had some fun in that dingy after-school daycare room. But the fact of the matter is, we didn’t. The label on the front of the box, in case you couldn’t tell, is a playful misspelling of the plural of “headbands”, and somewhat fittingly, our mispronunciation of this title matched the contents of the box. See, the box may have had “hedbanz” written on it, but it had no headbands inside it, not to mention any sort of instruction manual. All the box contained was a bunch of weird cards with weird subjects and cartoonish drawings.

As children, we were left to form our own interpretation of this. We knew it was a game but had little to no guidance on how it was meant to be played. One way or another though, over multiple games and weeks at this daycare, we converged onto a single set of rules.

Now in this day, I can tell you exactly what those rules are and how to play Habendaz, but what’s more interesting is the process by which we landed on them and built this game. I’ve dug deep into the furthest reaches of my mind though and I think this explanation will be pretty accurate. So here’s what I’ve got:


Habendaz Rules:

Habendaz is a social/competitive card game between two players and a mandatory third party, meaning it requires a minimum of 3 people to get going. The two players share a well shuffled deck of repurposed Hedbanz cards to play. The common deck is placed in the middle between the two.

To start, each player will draw 4 cards from the deck to build a hand and then by whatever the heck means they want, decide who goes first, but it works best if the more experienced one has the first turn as first player has a disadvantage.

Now, there is a concept of a board, but its invisible. This I believe we took from the YuGiOh card game which was very popular at the time and inspired us a lot. In fact, I’ve pretty sure that at some point we actually thought the game was an older version of YuGiOh since it had a weird name and the cards, unlike traditional playing cards, had characters on them rather than just symbols and numbers.

So each player has a set of 4 spaces in front of them, I think because that’s how much space there was on the table we used to play on, and a player can choose to place them in one of three positions inspired by YuGiOh, either attack mode, defense mode, or defense mode face down. A player can choose to place as many as the maximum 4 cards on the field as they want in the first phase of their turn, and can also re position previously placed cards.

The second phase of the turn is the attack phase. At this point, the player can choose to have their face up attacking cards fight with the opponents cards. For winning a battle, you got to claim the enemy’s defeated card. The player with the most claimed cards at the end wins. Since the deck is shared, the best strategy is to claim as many victories as possible with as few cards as you can, that’s it.

But hold up, hold down, and move it all around. I left out a really critical piece of the pie here ladies and gentlemen. In a battle like this, how do you determine a winner? Here, is where we hit a major roadblock, the solution to which is what I think makes Habendaz a really remarkable game.

You see, unlike YuGiOh or pokemon or magic cards, these cards didn’t have descriptions, effects, attack points, defense points, magic points, or anything concrete at all, nothing to indicate which would win in a head to head or head to butt fight. How do you decide if a tree beats a sandwich? A dog beats a cat? A doctor beats a car? All we had to go on was the name and image on each card, and picking a winner between two competing players led to many disputes. Since the cards strengths and weaknesses were immeasurable, The only way to win a fight was to convince your opponent that your card was better than theirs, and since both players always had their own points as a priority, it was clear this would be impossible. You draw up a Payoff Matrix of this system and its clear that there’s no balance. Since a win can only be achieved by your opponent agreeing that you should win instead of them, it often meant nobody would win, the two players could never resolve the outcome of a match.

This is where that mandatory third player comes in, or in the case of us at daycare, the audience of other kids surrounding our matches.

The way it worked was that players would make propositions on the outcomes of situations where the subjects of the cards would interact. Then, the audience members would decide which one would be the winner. The game, despite having a semblance of a structured ruleset borrowed from YuGiOh, instantly became a social game. It wasn’t about tricking your enemy and building up good strategies, it was about convincing the audience that you were right. Habendaz was kind of like a speed debate class with the cards serving as inspiration for the topics.


The nature of the game meant that when it came to battles, anything could go. You could make up your own rules so long as they agreed, read the audience to get a feel for the sorts of things you’d think they’d back you up on. If you know they agreed that a dog would beat a ball because you couldn’t convince them that it would choke on it, then you also know that they would let a cat beat yarn, so don’t make that play.

Since our group playing and spectating never changed over the multiple times we played, we kind of started to build a set of universal rules we always followed through on. For example, Babe Ruth always won against any other sport related card, I don’t know why, someone probably made a really good one time and it just stuck. There was this one card of a plastic surgeon, but I think the game we had might have been adult oriented because in the background there was a stick figure grasping at his groin and the doctor was holding a pair of scissors in one hand and, to draw from our innocent 90’s kid vocabulary, the guy’s “weiner” in the other, so it was a rule that she always beat any male character.

And I’ll never forget the longest debate we ever had as kids which revolved around the matchup of Mother Nature vs Killer Bee, what we had agreed were the two most powerful cards in the game. Mother Nature, we decided, could easily beat any opposing card unless there was a really really good argument from the other side, which as a result of this we decided she could only be used once, and Killer Bee was agreed to beat all other living things without question. The problem was though, we could never decide which card should beat the other, and for good reason. This was no ordinary Habendaz debate, this went beyond and our decision here had real implications for how we’d view the world for the rest of our lives. We kids weren’t prepared to decide whether to place our chips in faith or science. Yes, killer bees could not have existed without nature, but they were created in a lab unnaturally and possessed traits that made them a real threat. They surpassed other bees, does that place them outside the domain of mother nature’s influence.

Given that the deck was shared between both players each game, this match only happened a few times, but each it did it led to lengthy deliberations that forced each player to make a case that there was a chance they didn’t really agree with, only to eventually decide no winner for that fight.

At times when the audience wasn’t easily swayed one way or another, the players would have to think fast and make concessions, propose more acceptable and less one-sides outcomes to their cards. This led to things like losses that left crippling effects among other statuses that would remain for the rest of the game. For instance I might give up trying to explain how my squirrel in defense mode wouldn’t be killed by your bird and forfeit you the victory, but on the condition that your birds wings are broken now for the rest of its time on the field, setting myself up for a play later. Or maybe sure, your firefighter can break my rock, but in the process he shatters his axe and can’t use it in any future fights. Anything goes so long as you can get the viewers to side with it.

And winning wasn’t always about killing or fighting each other, sometimes it was just about one-upping. I’d agree that a coffee machine beats a kettle if a player argued that you can make tea in both, but only a coffee maker can also make coffee. Or, say I’ve got a car and you’ve got a street. Cars drive on streets, I win. Or you could rebut saying that cars can’t get around without streets. It's up to the third party to decide, if they even could. Not every battle needed to be resolved immediately, the cards can stay on the field in the case of an impasse, maybe to be combined later. It’d be hard to argue that my chef could beat your tiger, but hey, if he drives in my car down your road and runs it over, maybe he’ll have a better chance. It’s all about creativity.

And that’s what I think made the game so much fun, it was creative. Aside from a few basic foundational rules that provided a good pacing, the simple set of variables that included the cards, the players and the audience meant that the outcomes would be unpredictable. Habendaz was a conduit for good times and good laughs, it was a highlight of undoubtedly the worst part of day, being the kids staying so late at school for our parents to come pick us up, slowly but surely plucking members away from our audience as the night went on. It was a fun time-waster but also deeply challenging, forcing us to use a combination of logic, reasoning and humor to win.


And growing up, having played many more casual social games, party games, it seems like, in my experiences at least, the most successful ones, success which I measure as a function of general familiarity and laughs in play, are those which are person driven, those that only provide a framework for interaction that everyone wants but maybe not everyone knows how to get to.


Never have I ever… played Never Have I Ever, believe it or not, but that sort of game is just an excuse to talk very vulnerably about really weird stuff and stimulate fun conversations. Never have I ever is actually just simplified streamlined upscaled Truth or Dare. Streamlined in the sense that the “Dare” option is removed, because we all know that’s not the real point of the game, which to be honest is probably why I never wound up in a round of Never Have I Ever with my friends because I was the sort of dumbo picked Dare every time and just ended up licking the wall or something, freaking gross ass kid. Truth is the dominant strategy in the meta of Truth or dare, think of it: the meta of Truth or Dare is to learn / share juicy shit with your friends. If you pick Dare every time, people will see you as a closed book and stop picking you. Not being picked means you never get to pick anyone else, so you just end up not being a player anymore. The dominant strategy in Truth or Dare is to 1) lead a promiscuous life, and 2) always pick Truth.

Simplified in the sense that all Truth queries are made in a yes-or-no format.

And upscaled in the sense that each question is posed to the whole group at once instead of one person at a time, so you get all answers at once, and also you drink every time you’ve done the thing which means the most promiscuous people will become influenced much quicker and gain more momentum.

Never Have I Ever is a really great sequel when you think about it, and what makes it work is that it’s completely people driven. You can’t really draw a payoff graph because any sort of question can be asked, and different people may want to know different things. Assuming you’re not cheating by lying, there’s no strategy to the game, it’s just a thing to do at a party to have fun.


Compare this to a pretty bad party game: Shit Happens, in which you rank shitty situations on an ordinal scale, something that on its own is fun and after my own heart, but where it fails is in the fact that winning is based on how close your ranking is to that of some random, and as the evidence shows, daft group of people they sampled to get the true rankings from.

Like, check this out. So according to this game, having irritable bowel syndrome somehow isn’t as bad as farting on your first date. Then a tree falling on your house is worse than both of those, fair enough, which is topped by having a swastika shaped scar on your cheek, which, okay, maybe, that’s a tough one, but what’s certainly NOT worse than losing your home or being mistook as a nazi for the rest of your life is having a boner at work!

There’s this weird theme revolving around first dates, the people surveyed seemed really sensitive about them. Yeah, forgetting your wallet is bad, but not this bad, it doesn’t belong anywhere in the same realm as your spouse becoming alcoholic, or this, jesus christ, this card, or hell, your parents separating. How is this a top tier card? About 50% of people these days have seen a parent’s marriage end in divorce at least once. You’re telling me such a common thing is this bad? Christ, you deal man. It’s not as bad as being with an alcoholic, getting the ketch UP your ass, or your house losing a fight to a tree, or expulsing from your bowels this much on the reg, or freeeeeaking looking like a nazi!

This game, Shit Happens, comes in with the right intention. It feels like the game is about discussing the situations with your friends, sharing experiences related to the cards and having a good time, but some of them are too ridiculous to have ever happened to anyone and the comparison to the nonsensical scores makes it lame. The game ties too much to the rule that you have to get the cards in the right order. It’s too rule driven and this takes away the opportunity to be creative which is what drives the fun times and the party.

Shit Happens? Yeah, Shit Happens to stink!



What I liked about Habendaz over a game like Shit Happens is that, well first, you don’t have to buy it, it’s played using recycled materials, but also that if the rules you’ve made up start to make the game boring, you can switch them up and fully express your creativity. Shit Happens, falling back on this strict rule set and this dumb commitment to these predetermined “shittyness” scores that don’t mean anything to anyone actually playing, the game has this base level boringness that you eventually reach. A game like Habendaz on the other hand doesn’t, it can only possible be as boring as the group of people playing it can possibly be.

So are there any games like Habendaz, ones with some sort of structure to guide people but that are still accessible and unobtrusive and driven by, freaking, humanity? Yeah, and ironically it’s called Cards Against Humanity, haha, or not actually. When I was first introduced to it, I interpreted its name meaning, like, the game is about the nasty content of the cards vs people’s “humanity” telling them not to play them, but no, that’s not what the title means at all, but hey, it was a good attempt.

So for those of you who didn’t go to college (and given where I know my audience comes from, that’s quite a fair amount of you), Cards Against Humanity is a FREE social game where one player reads off a sentence from a card with a big blank space somewhere in it. Then, all the other players choose cards from their hands that they think best fills in the blank. They place their cards face down for the reader of the round to read out, not knowing who chose what, and then they pick their favorite filled-in blank. The player who submitted the winning option gets a point, and then the reader for the next round is rotated and it all starts again.


So for example, which I’m stealing directly from the game’s website, say the reader reads “Instead of coal, Santa now gives the bad children BLANK”, and then you put some dumb crap like “the art of seduction” and I put “vietnam flashbacks”, then I would win, because when the judge reads “Santa now gives the bad children vietnam flashbacks”, I’m thinking full-on like the Giver or something, then they would laugh harder and choose mine.




See, that’s the meta of Cards Against Humanity. The cards are awful, but you can line them up pretty well to get some funny bits. If you’ve ever played it before, you know that 90% percent of the time it’s the funniest card that wins the round, aka the funniest person who wins the game, so even a loss isn’t really a loss because just in playing the game, you’re being entertained which has value, it’s a form of payoff. And that’s the same with Habendaz, playing any role in the game, the winner, the loser, the audience, anything and everything is still fun, the only action with negative payoff you do in either of these games is not play in the first place.

Cards Against Humanity still has that structure it bases itself on. You can’t just say whatever you want, this isn’t amateur hour at the comedy shack, the jokes are in the cards, you’re limited to which ones you draw which balances the game a bit, it means the funniest or wittiest people might have an advantage, but less funny people (like Kevan) will still have a chance from time to time.

But something else that I mentioned about Habendaz which made it really special holds true in this game too is that n both of these games, a great strategy, which, again, executing doesn’t just help you personally but makes the whole experience more fun for everyone, but anyways, that strategy is to read the room and get a feel for what people are into.

For example, maybe too many goofy cards have been played recently and it’s time to drop something really dark.

This… this is literally one of the displayed card sets on their website guys… oh holy hell...



Or maybe, because you’re playing with a friend, you might be able to make a play that touches them in some personal way that ensures your victory. There’s one friend in particular that I’m thinking of who, honestly I don’t know for what reason, but there’s one card in the game that, like, no matter what it’s with, like, just reading this freaking ridiculous card just rolls her down on the freaking floor. Like, she can’t take it, she always lets that one win, no matter what.

Cards Against Humanity is really fun and despite limiting you to preset cards, still really expressive. After a few rounds you can start to tell which of your friends is making which combo. It’s the sort of game, much like Habendaz, that’ll have you remember certain plays either you or other people made. My all-time favorite I think that I’ve ever seen was something like “Harry Potter and the Chamber of Lumberjack Fantasies”. It’s just too good.

And also, like Habendaz, aside from a few repurposed resources, it’s free. You straight go to the site, download like a pdf of all the cards, print it and cut them out yourself, for like, nothing. And if you don’t have a pair of scissors you can buy the game pre-cut for like a $20. Not to discredit it’s design or structure or gameplay, but that accessibility alone is probably the main factor responsible for its wide spread.

All through Amsterdam, straight to Italy, you can feel the beat of Cards Against Humanity… that was a uh… an Eiffel 65 reference, specifically to the titular song of their album “Europop”... I realize if I don’t explicitly express this, it’ll be lost… because nobody except for me freaking cares about Eiffel 65 in 2018.

But speaking of Eiffel 65, an anchor to the opening of this video, AND the spread of Cards Against Humanity, the present moment we’re anchoring it to, another place you can find CAH is in digital, on the net, the internet, shaken not stirred.
https://pyx-3.pretendyoure.xyz/zy/game.jsp


So, Computers: they’re kind of amazing. Something very rule driven or simulation based, like say Metal Gear Solid, or Pikmin, or Shit Happens, games who’s systems guide the player in navigating a complex gameplay graph with a set amount of breadth and a set amount of depth, these sorts of games are well suited to be managed by computers. Computers can simulatively handle billions of different things per second and provide for us an experience can we can either have or not have. Basically, regardless of whether you’ve personally played it or not, every possible gameplay scenario in Metal Gear Solid, Pikmin, and Shit Happens exists.

But a game like Cards Against Humanity? Even in a context like this where players connect online via networked machines, the players are still people and the game is still driven by them, it’s still people driven. Without people, sure there’s some code that sets up the rounds and allows people to join and disband from lobbies, there’s some system that handles persistence of the deck of cards and people’s hands, okay cool, whatever, but without people the game doesn’t exist. Same goes for the cards, without people, it’s just a bunch of paper you probably got your mom to print at work for you because it cost nothing.

Even in another context of machine learning, which the official Cards Against Humanity company seems to be experimenting with using people to train their AI, https://www.cardsagainsthumanity.com/lab/
Even that, that’s reliant on people. Anything this hypothetical comedy bot they might be building will be able to do, it will have learned from people. It’s still people driven. It’s not like they solved humor here or something.

There are infinitely many reasons someone could find something funny. Like we said earlier, Cards Against Humanity can only be as boring as your friends are, but the same is true for how much fun it can be.

Habendaz, a game my friends and I unintentionally and kind of unknowingly invented in grade school daycare, like, I mean, we legit thought this was what the game was, but Habendaz is the same.

There are infinitely many reasons someone could succeed or fail at convincing at least one other person that a shoe could beat US president George Bush. And on top of that, there are infinitely many reasons at least one other person could find that entertaining.

Maybe there are a couple of basic rules to follow, maybe there are a couple of cards to shuffle, but at the end of the day, what lies at the center of Habendaz is the people having fun playing it.

Without people, Habendaz is just… well… actually, I was about to say it’s just a bunch of cards, but technically without people Habendaz is just Hedbanz, another really good social game but a substantially less creative and expressive one.

So uh… call to action? You probably have a box of Hedbanz lying around somewhere, so uh… I don’t know. Do you really need me telling you to invite your friends over for a good time? Nah. Didn’t think so.

I hope you’ve enjoyed this contextualization of this weird game through the exploration of other social game. If you actually do end up giving it a go with some friends, be sure to fire me a tweet and let me know what’s good.

That being said, uh, I don’t know why but I’ve got a craving for some serious ice cream right now.

Peace out my fucking doggies.


God of War

Hello and welcome to our second stop on the road to Metal Gear Solid V. Today, God of War.

So sometime last year during that weird game phase I had, I got to thinking about console classics. I looked to my old PS3, and realized, hey, holy crap, I never played God of War. I mean, I knew it was a big deal, but I had no idea what it was about. I promptly looked it up, and during my research, realized that the entire remastered trilogy was available on PS3 for like 16 bucks, and that’s canadian, so down in the states where the most of you are that’s like what? 2 dollars? Pffftt! Honestly, if the mere mention of that price tickled your interest, if you haven’t played any of these games either, and if you still have a functioning Playstation 3, please, pause the video and go order it. It’s still the same price. Like, look, whole video summarized right now: it’s an awesome game, go buy it, go play it, have fun! I’ll be waiting?

You’re back? Alright!

So let’s talk for a minute about “movie games”. Now I don’t mean games based on movies, and I don’t mean movies based on games, I, ugh, like, this is the most casual accepted term for this. The proper name is “interactive movie”, but I don’t like saying that. For simple choose your own adventure type movies on DVD, playing specific clips depending on the choice made through the menus, that works, but when an 10 year old home console is beating it’s little heart trying to render these HD graphics LIVE on-screen, you can’t just call it a movie, you’ve gotta include the word “game” somehow.

So, movie games. When I say that, you’re probably thinking of stuff like the Telltale games or life is strange, stuff like that. I always think of Heavy Rain because it’s the only one I’ve ever really had any experience with. My brother had it at one point, and I remember watching him go through it. I’m not interested at all by the genre though, so I haven’t bothered spending any time with any of these. Fact is though, this one of the largest growing genres to date, or at least it seems. Some of these games have even managed to afford hollywood casts, like Beyond Two Souls. 

So what are these products exactly, to those who don’t know? Well, a general definition is that they’re stories being told through the medium of a game which a player may have little control over. Often these games boast features such as branching paths which are driven through based on various choices players make throughout the story. Some decisions may have insignificant effects, while others may cause more drastic consequences. In most of these games, the player takes on the role of a cast of characters which they switch between from time to time. The degree to which the player has control also varies from game to game and scene to scene: at some points you may be moving a character around freely in 3D space, and others only selecting choices from a couple of options.

The idea is that these games are supposed to look and feel like movies that the player is apart of. It’s like if you were watching a film and every once in a while the characters stopped and asked you for guidance or advice. I understand the concept, and I think it’s cool, but it’s just not something I’m into.

The reason these games work is that they’re accessible. I’ve talked about accessibility of game briefly before I think. The problem with games, as a form of entertainment, is that getting into them is complicated. I’ve sure you’ve seen this before, but people who don’t play many console or computer games get very confused when presented with the modern dual stick setup. Left stick is for movement and right stick is for camera position, simple enough to me and you, but confusing, awkward, and frustrating to anyone who hasn’t played before. How often do you see non gamers get stuck looking at the ground? Unable to move, or even diagnose the problem. That’s why it’s dangerous to allow such skill intensive things become standards, because immediately you cut-out a whole demographic from your potential audience: people who are not already gamers cannot play your game. This scares me, this is how console games will die.

These games though, anyone can follow. Nothing crazy is going on, the game doesn’t depend on your skill or dexterity, but rather things like your power to observe and deduce, your ability to reason about fictional characters playing out a scenario on your television. Everyone watches TV, everyone goes to the cinema, so this sort of experience is natural to anyone. Even when action is happening, the game doesn’t require you to first be able to point the camera in the direction of said action before performing, it does all that for you. The games are accessible to everyone, they don’t alienate anyone, and that’s cool!

Side note, that’s also why I think it’s really funny how so many youtubers get angry when game companies ban their content from monetization, and then make videos or lets plays with these games. One of the most common arguments, or just, excuses you hear is that it’s great advertisement for the companies and their games. I can tell you as a matter of fact though that I know a couple of people who watch let’s plays of these sorts of games not for the commentary by the host, but for the content of the game itself. People who don’t even have the capacity or equipment to run the game themselves are able to just watch someone else play, and when it comes to games like these, this is as close to streaming yourself watching a movie as it gets. The people I know who watch these don’t give a penny to the people who actually made the game, all their money goes to the guy who’s the first search result on youtube for life is strange or the new walking dead episode or whatever. Sorry, when you see someone complain about their videos not making any money while making a 48 part series on a story that everyone is watching exclusively for just that, the story, not your goofy and infrequent comments, you’re no better than those reaction videos, hypocrites man. Anyways, sorry about that...

So the point is, computer games for a long time have been a hobby requiring advanced skill and dedication, but these movie games allow people with neither to participate. Now, with just the minimum familiarity with computers that it takes to register for a freaking facebook account, you too can play games!

But, newly certified Playstation owner who’s just spent $600+ on a console and game, again, in Canadian, the question reads: are you a gamer?

The answer to this is actually equivalent to the answer of another question. You ever heard of Atmosfear? It’s an old board game that came with a DVD. You’d all sit around and play on the board while frequently being interrupted by a guy on the screen who would give you special instructions. So, does playing Atmosfear make you a gamer? Absolutely not. Why does it matter though? Because being a gamer isn’t just about playing games, it’s about the games you play and whether or not they’re really games. Atmosfear doesn’t make you a gamer in the same way that darksouls or metal gear solid do, but Atmosfear is a more complex game than something like Telltale’s minecraft story mode. You’re not just following a story, there are complex mechanics and rules, you’re not just pressing the odd button every once in awhile, you’re doing stuff. You’re playing actively.

The problem is that while these movie games get their movie parts down pretty good, they seem to flake out on what makes them games. Like I said, the degree to which the player has control depends on the game, but for the most part, it’s not very great. I once tried to define gameplay, I think in my FNAF video. I can’t find the exact quote right now, but it went something along the lines of “in a game, the player is an agent acting within a virtual world. Gameplay is their agency, their ability to make decisions and perform actions that cause changes in the game world to occur, that force other actors within the game to modify their behavior or responses.” When the majority of the game is scripted though, there’s not much agency left to the player, there isn’t much gameplay, and so is this even a game?  Can a game exist without gameplay?

Here’s a little thought experiment. Imagine a set of 3 VHS cassettes that contain film for a movie. After watching tape 1, the last couple of frames ask you a question and tell you which tape to pop in next depending on your choice. The cassette you choose contains the rest of the film, based on the choice you made. Is this movie now instantly a game because there’s a single instance of interaction? I don’t think so, I don’t think you do either.

But regardless, I mean you could spend $30 on a cool criminal mystery action adventure game playing almost entirely through quicktime events (for those non-gamers watching, these are those sections where the game prompts you to press buttons or perform actions really fast and you fail if you mess up or don’t do it in time, trust me, this’ll be important later), where the opening scene features GASP! Shaking a carton of orange juice? Holy crap! OOOOOR! You could spend half the price on 3 games, one of which opens with a battle against the Colossus of Rhodes! I mean, it’s your choice, you know. You could be doing this, OOOR this! Yo look at this ppoof poof bang pow wow! Check it! Come on! Look at how cool this is?

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IeLO28_K08


3 pages into the script and we’re finally here. God of War 3, a game that came out 6 years ago, and even though it doesn’t officially share the same genre tag as the games we started with, what I’m going to talk about today is how it does everything that these “movie games” do, but better, while also indisputably being very much a real game.

To be fair, it all started with the opening scene of God of War 2. God of War 1 was okay, but you can tell that they weren’t so comfortable with the idea of making it look like a movie. I mean, sometimes the camera would snap to these really weird positions, and it’s like what? Am I playing Metal Greek Solid or something? (YEEEEEEEEEEEEAAAAAAAAAAH). But God of War 2 holy crap. You start off playing as the freaking god of war! You come down from the heavens! Woooooosh! Booooom! But then the lightning thing bzzzzzz! Whoooosh! And then the colossus comes to life! OOOh boy! And then you start, bffff bfff bffff, yeah, you start fighting these guys! OOOOH but then you fight the big guy again yiiiiikes! And then, like, you get inside of him! And like holy crap! Like, you’re inside of his giant head, and you can see the battle-torn city through the holes in his own face. Now that, that’s cinematic! And that’s just the beginning!

But anyways, I’m going to focus on the third game, because that’s when they really nailed everything. I’m gonna save the best for last though, so don’t worry if it doesn’t feel like I’m hitting you with the hard stuff right away.


Gameplay (simple, fun, easy, changes throughout series to only cinematic stuff)

So gameplay. How does a game need to play for it not to alienate players who aren’t already, well, just that, players, but also not make seasoned veterans of the gaming scene feel like babies?

In God of War, you have full control over Kratos, your character, for the majority of the game. Navigation is super simple, you don’t have to prepare every movement by aiming your view in a desired direction, you simply point your analog thumbstick in a direction you want to go relative to your position on the screen, and you move. No need to worry about moving your view because the camera is controlled automatically by the game. I promise, I will talk a lot more about this later. But the jist of it is that non-gamers are conditioned to understand how cameras work in movies, they only show you the relevant information, and so when they transition to games, they have a lot of difficulty understanding what’s happening.

Here though, you can’t ever get stuck looking at the ground or at a corner, the game always lets you know where you are, where you need to go, and gives you all of the necessary information to determine how to get there using a single input stick.

Combat, similarly, is extremely simple and accessible. Sure you could challenge yourself on the harder difficulties, but when the easiest setting is called “spartan”, I feel no shame choosing it.

Pressing one button launches light attacks, another initiates heavier strikes, and the last executes grabs which can be transitioned easily into kills or charges. That’s it. No matter what you’re doing, if you’re standing on normal ground, climbing a vertical wall, hanging from the ceiling, calling attacks mid-jump, or even hanging from a rope, these 3 buttons are all you really need to know in order to fight. No enemies ever require any special moves or anything to beat them, so the player can, if they want to, play the game by button mashing, which, if you’ve ever handed a controller to a parent, you probably know is the first thing they’ll do.

Combat is super easy, anyone can do it and be good at it. Yes, there are advanced techniques, but even those are super easy to use and consistent with the rest of the game. I complained once about how stick and button combination attacks in darksouls were kind of inconsistent, some causing attacks to be more powerful, and others less. In God of War, after leveling up your main blades, you get the ability to hold down R1 while pressing one of the attack buttons. Both of these attacks are designed to cover larger areas and be more powerful, which makes sense to a player, it makes it easy to understand. Then, once the developers have taught that little nifty trick to the player, they take advantage of it by applying the same logic to all of the other weapons too. In any other hack and slack, I might be nervous switching from a pair of swords to the hercules fist things. These are totally different weapons! But, combinations of R1 with both Square and Triangle lead to similar attacks, one is some sort of spinning attack, and the other is a large forward blast. My explanation might not do it justice, but the idea is that rather than being filled with anxiety when a new weapon is earned, you know, being nervous about having to learn how to use it, the player already knows how it works. This is God of War, and while all weapons have different advantages, abilities, and uses, they all work the same ways. Knowing how to use one means you know how to use them all, and that’s super cool.

Because of this, how easy it is to learn offensive combat, it give the opportunity to the player to experiment with combos and more complex moves are an early point.

Other than that, main combat includes two defensive techniques. Blocking is called by holding down a shoulder button and works just as you’d expect. Again, novice players can pick up the feature quite easily, but those with more experience will learn that hitting block JUST before taking a hit gives them a moment to issue a counter attack, dealing massive damage. The other option is to dodge, which is controlled by a flick of the right control stick. What’s really cool though is that the dodge your character makes is relative to the camera’s position, so if danger is coming from a certain direction, you just tap the stick in the opposite direction to get out of the way. It feels so natural to move out of the way like that. Again, a very simple mechanic, but some players might try to use the opportunity gained from a dodge to launch a special heavy attack.

Every mechanic is kind of like that. Everything is super simple and more than enough to get through the game, but they all leave room for curious player to figure out.

Now, a problem arises. The combat is super easy to use and everything, but for those grand finales, those few critical strikes on a big boss enemy, you want them to look spectacular, cinematic, not so gamey. Enter quick-time events.

At certain points throughout a battle, the player enters this short quick-time sections where they’re forced to press a series of buttons in-time with the events happening on screen. Just like other movie games, these sorts of segments allow the player to interact with the game while their character performs a series of actions that would have been impossible to control themselves, but also, looks really cool! The best part is that most of them aren’t just about pressing a button quickly, but about mashing the circle button to push something open, like the doors to various temples or the fingers of the titan Kronos as he tries to crush you (again, similar actions, similar input, great consistency), or tapping both shoulder buttons super fast to rip something apart or push something back. Or, my favorite, pushing in both thumb sticks for Kratos to gouge out Poseidon’s eyes. That’s awesome!

Again though, even quick-time events can be taken advantage of by players who know what they’re doing. In some scenarios, it might be about knowing when the appropriate time is to launch one, for example in the opening scene where you have to weaken poseidon’s horse and open its shell before using it’s torn off leg as a skewer. A better example though is how some standard enemies can be killed either normally or through quicktime events. The thing is though, killing them different ways will result in different rewards. Normal kills always give you red orbs which are used as currency, but killing minotaurs with a finishing move will give you health back, and killing medusas that way will refill your magic gauge. This adds a certain amount of strategy to otherwise pretty simple and fun combat. By deciding how to kill certain enemies, you can improve your chances of success. That’s cool.

Finally, the game features a couple of special items on top of your normal weapons, but other than the severed head of Helios, the god of the sun, which you use as a freaking flashlight, none of them are used for more than a single main section, and none are really required for combat. So while you could argue that they’re a bit too complicated for a movie game, I would argue that it doesn’t matter, because you don't even really need them.

Now, the games weren’t all like this. Both previous God of War titles included, on top of all of this, these weird out of place tight-rope walking sections. They were really weird, boring, and didn’t fit the themes or settings of the game. They also didn’t meld well with the automatic camera, causing you to fall off as the view adjusts itself. But, assumably, the developers realized that this gameplay feature didn’t really fit so well with the cinematic vibe, and so it was removed by the third game.

UI

So other than playing the game, the other technical thing a player needs to be able to do with a game is interact with its UI to do what they want to do. Games these days typically include very complex interfaces which throw off a lot of potential adopters. God of War’s UI, much like the rest of the game, is super simplified. You want to upgrade a weapon? Go to it, and press X to start pouring blood into the meter. This is a simple and great visual way of expressing to anyone how the power-up system works. Forget about instant purchases which can’t be reversed, this system is more forgiving, you can stop halfway through if you want, cancel the upgrade process. The UI accommodates and accounts for novice users, and that’s great.

So we talked about how movie games have to feature simple and accessible gameplay, but were presented a problem which was that most oversimplify things, make things boring, or cause the player to perform mundane tasks. We’ve seen now how God of War’s gameplay, which is much more elaborate than we’d expect from a movie game, still manages to be easily usable by anyone, regardless of skill or experience with games.

Next, it’s time to talk about one of the most important parts of any move game: it’s story.

Story (epic, greek, cool, mature, backtracks and repeated sets (not pure linear like most games), onyx)

Sometimes, as sad as it is and as much as you probably know it bothers me, a poorly made game can be saved from panning by a decent narrative, so it’s no surprise that this is no different for movie games. Most of these games are either highly dramatic and tug at your heartstrings, or based on horror, keeping you involved, and always feature mature content. These game’s abilities to keep you entertained has more to do with these genres they come in than the game’s own merit. That’s why a lot of them feel the same, not every type of story fits the medium so well.

Enter, God of War, a story of revenge, of one man’s anger with and triumph over the gods. Forget setting up a weekly soap opera style story, this is about mimicking a cinematic experience! Not only is the story epic, but it’s set up more like a movie. Every game has a powerful, action packed opening and trigger, not unlike a James Bond, followed by a slow rising action, the main trials the protagonist needs to face along his journey, and finally, a massive climactic ending which always brings the player back to the place they began.

That idea of reusing sets is an idea that comes from movies, you know, the hero’s adventure begins and ends in the same place. In games we’ve seen such backtracking before, but it was normally drawn out of necessity because of hardware limitations. Here though, this is the PS3, anything is possible. 

When you fall into the titan Gaia’s heart at the beginning of the game, back when she’s your ally, and notice the unbreakable material protecting her heart, it’s not just a random and pointless observation, this has been done to set you up for the grand finale. During the fight with Zeus, Gaia appears, and the two of you face off inside of her body. At this point though, you have the tool necessary to break the stones protecting her weakest spot, and by doing that, you’re able to impale both her and Zeus at the same time!

Despite the first game not being as cinematic, even it followed the same idea. After returning to Athens and using pandora’s box to grow into a giant, Kratos uses a bridge in the shape of a giant sword which he crossed towards the beginning of the game, as a weapon to fight and defeat Ares.

This idea of sandwiching the entire story of the game between a common location is cool, and isn’t an idea which came from other games, but rather was borrowed by cinema.

The third game handles this even better. Not only do you return for the ending, but throughout the entire game you travel back and forth between a handful of common areas. The most obvious is the hut where Hephaestus stays. You go through many sections of the game, just to emerge back there seemingly randomly, just to have a chat with him, of course, setting you up for the scene where he betrays you and you finally have to kill him. Almost every other environment gets revisited too though, and it’s cool when they reuse the same shots from the beginning, but with you now no longer in the foreground, for example this area from literally the first part of the game, where a couple of times, you return, climbing up the chain of balance.

And the way the chain of balance is used to tie different areas together is cool too. Like, a couple of times, Kratos needs to either return to the underworld, to the labyrinth, or back to the palace at the top of mount olympus, and every time he does it, he either scales the chain, as I said before, or flies or falls towards his destination, the chain always in sight. When you finally destroy the chain, being held by the three king judges of the dead, it’s a powerful moment. Now you can pull it back up to the top. Holy crap, symbolism in a videogame! My goodness! This is probably one of the most meaningful symbols I’ve ever seen in a game.

And this is super cool! I mean, a lot of not-so-movie games but kind-of movie games that people like a lot, including The Last of Us, never really do this kind of stuff. You’re always moving forward, but sometimes going back to a previous location, seeing how things have changed since last you’ve been there, that can be really moving, and it’s a great storytelling technique.

So not only is the game’s story well structured and perfectly suited for an adventure game, but incase you couldn’t tell, it’s also based on Greek Myth. The thing is though, you’d think they’d handle this in some gimmicky sort of way, but they don’t. There’s so much respect for myth put into this game it’s crazy, and everyone I know who’s played it has gotten interested in mythology because of it. It’s not a substitute for the actual stories, but you know, after killing some guy trapped in a cell of bramble and stealing his bow, you get curious, do some research, and learn that he’s Pirithous, a king who tried to sneak into the underworld and kidnap Persephone, but was captured by Hades. Or there’s the whole thing about the colossus of Rhodes, not even myth, but a real statue that once stood on this earth. There’s icarus’ wings too which you get by killing icarus in the second game, but just like the story, they don’t work so well, so you can’t actually fly with them, you can only glide a bit. I mean, just look at the whole level in hades. The whole stage is filled with the ambience of death. Soft vocals are echoing through the caverns, the bodies of the dead are falling from the sky at random intervals, it’s incredible.

Not only do these mythological themes play a role in the story, but they also have direct impact on gameplay. One of my favorite things about the games is how each one starts off with Kratos being fully leveled up because of the events of the previous game, but after something goes wrong, he loses all of these abilities. After falling during the siege of olympus, kratos lands in the river styx where while trying to swim to land, lost souls pull at him. Not only is this an incredible way to show that kratos is losing his power, but the fact that the player can actually see the health and magic bars being reset to normal really has an impact.

And as you progress through the game and the story, as you defeat god after god, you slowly regain some of your old powers, as well as new items from your enemies. You get to wield Hade’s chains, the bow of apollo, the boots of hermes, not only are you moving forward, but you feel yourself growing stronger, gaining new abilities. Unlike other movie games where the decisions you make just get harder and harder as you get closer to the end, in God of War, you have that all so great megaman-like powerup system, you’re powers are always changing, you’re always changing, and it’s cool.

But just the fact that a game, a freaking video game, is able to get someone like me actually genuinely interested in greek mythology, is super cool.

The thing that makes myth a bit unique is that fact that not only is it ancient, but it used to be a part of an actual religion. Unlike today’s surviving faith’s that aim to teach people how to lead their lives respectfully, greek mythology was less about morals and more about stories. It was kind of like reality TV. “Oh! I wonder who Zeus is gonna impregnate in the next episode!”. What sucks though is that as time went on, different branches of mythology came to exist, gods had their names changed, stories changed, everything kind of got lost, and today, people learn about this stuff for fun. This collection of stories, as a result of all of this, was never wrapped up, it never ended. Chronologically, there’s no “last” greek myth. Some experts have actually made the claim that Christianity may have been the last one, and fun story, that Jesus may have been based on the god that I actually share a name with, haha, but, evidently, not everyone is so happy with that, including myself. And from a storytelling perspective, I mean, is this really any way to end such a great series of tales? So after making love to a horse a creating the centaur, Zeus made love to a cow, and now we have the Westminster Baptist Church, nooo, that sucks.

That’s why I like this so much, and you have to respect them for that. They went in saying “hmm, what if we made a game about the end of greek mythology”. I mean, today it’s commonly accepted by all that none of the greek gods are real, but at one point, people believed in them as strongly as people today believe in their gods. So what happened to them? Where did they go? Hm, well what if a man, fallen from his own throne on olympus, earned by killing the god of war, used by the gods, used by even the titans, turns on everyone, leaves no trace of them, and frees humanity from their control? It’s a story about man defeating god, and in doing so, returning the power locked within pandora’s box, hope, back to the people of the world, leading us to the world we live in today. They tackled this crazy idea, and they succeeded.

And the thing about greek myth is that, when it comes to what’s canon and what’s not, I mean, it’s not owned by anybody, it’s not like comic books where we can ask questions like that. What really determined what are the stories that have survived until today was reach. I mean, everyone had the potential to write their own stories, and everyone did, but only people with the most reach, with the largest audiences willing to listen, were able to ensure their acceptance. Still, even with that, some myths contradict each other. Like I said, there’s no legal owner to the intellectual property that is mythology, it’s sort of like a shared thing that all of humanity has partial ownership of, we’ve inherited these stories as part of our past. This though. I mean, this is a game that sold millions of copies. And the way I see it, anyone willing to write a new story becomes an official writer. It’s not like there’s any additional requirements to writing myth. And I mean, of all the people in the world to have ever told a story about the greek gods, these people, these developers put more time and energy, I would argue, than all the rest combined, so as a way to recognize that hard work, I don’t see any reason not to be able to consider God of War the actual, canonical ending to the stories of greek mythology. There you go! Take that to your parents, your school teachers, your pastor, whatever! A freaking videogame ended greek myth in the best way possible, and I don’t care what anyone else thinks, but I think that’s awesome. Some of the oldest tales being written an end in today’s most modern storytelling medium haha.


But anyways, let’s get back to the technical stuff.


Appearance (cameras, development pipeline, graphics cheating(gow1 also), no loading screen, visual effects, interview with dad)


So as you may know, I take a lot of notes during recording sessions. For this video, I noticed something really cool early on, and as I made it further and further, I started to come up with an explanation as to how I thought they had done it. I intended to do some research or reach out to some ex-developer contacts I had made while working on another video that never saw the light of day… but after completing the game, the unlocked behind the scenes and development videos told me I was right.

The single coolest feature of this entire game, the feature which every other feature revolves around to some capacity, and the reason for which the game is so successful as a movie game, is the camera system.

Like I talked about before, the game, and all of the games throughout the series, feature automatic cameras. The player has no control themselves over their view. I mentioned before that this makes it easier for the player to learn how to use the game, but that is absolutely not the only thing it allows for.

As you’ve probably been able to tell, this game has outstanding visuals. Casual reminder, it’s 6 years old. I don’t know about you, but I don’t think I’ve ever seen a game on the PS3 look this good and perform this well. Yes, I know, I drooled all over RE5, but that game did have some pretty serious framrate drops at points. This game though, poooouuuf, it runs cool!

Now to understand how they pulled this off, we’re gonna take a look back at God of War 1 for the PS2. Now yeah, this game looks like crap, even for a PS2 game, and nobody really knows why, but let’s forget that for now. So here’s one of my favorite parts from the game. You’ve scaled Kronos, you’ve entered pandora’s temple, you’ve completed the entire first set of challenges, and now it’s time to move to the next floor. So you go down this long hallway and whoops, what was that? Did you see that? Yo, check this out. Can you see what’s going on here? So as this hallway is very long and connected to too many other large rooms, they probably ran into issues when trying to render the entire path at once. So, first, what they do is place the camera directly behind you so that you can’t see the areas behind you disappear when you leave. Then, they place an image of the other side of the hallway in the doorway, and one you get sufficiently close, they remove the image to reveal the entire rendered room. They also do the same thing when running down from the other direction. It’s like when Wile E Coyote would paint a picture of a road on the wall. Now that’s a pretty cool way of cheating graphically, you might think, but isn’t it weird that you’ve never seen this technique done before? Well, that’s because not every game is able to do that. To be able to place an image at the end of a corridor, the game needs to know EXACTLY what the room on the other side will look like, and the only way to do that is if the exact positions and angle of the camera are known.


This situation represents both main benefits of the camera system.

1) 
Loading can be masked by the camera. Need to unload one area and swap it in for another? No problem. Throw the character down a long twisting hallway with the camera forced to point forward. Not only does it look cool and add to the atmosphere, but it’s a great way to set up the scene ahead without the player knowing, and without having to see a loading screen. Oh yeah, did I mention that there are no loading screens in the game? Now that’s cool!

But secondly, and most impressively, using an automatic, preplaced camera allowed the developers to create the illusion of having higher detailed models and environments than any other game.

You see, when someone is designing a room like this, if they know already exactly what angles and positions the camera will be at, they know exactly which faces of each object will be within the camera’s view. More importantly, they know which faces will not.

So the way a game or any graphics project works is that you’ve got your pixels which are drawn based on fragments which come from the surfaces of models which are made of up triangles which are each a connection between 3 vertices. Long story short, computers are really good at drawing triangles, and the more they can draw at a steady rate, the better a game will look.

So let’s say, as an example, given some constraints, a PS3 can render I don’t know, 1000 triangles at once. But if your character is in the middle of a field and looking forwards, and let’s give him an advantage, he’s got a wide lense, the player only ever is actually looking at ¼ of the triangles, that’s 250, meaning 750 are wasted, being invisible at any point. But that doesn’t even account for hidden triangles, those behind walls or other obstacles, otherwise within the player’s line of sight. With a free camera though, you have no choice but to do this. If the player is able to move around and look in any direction they want, the only thing you can do is give everything a relatively common amount of detail.

But, return to a game like God of War. If I’m a designer and I know exactly what the camera can see, I now have the ability to pack all 1000 drawable triangles into just that viewable space, maximizing the amount of detail visible to the player.

Now I’m super cool and came up with this theory on my own, but after watching the developer video on cameras, I was proven right. I actually learned quite a lot about the development pipeline for god of war games at Santa Monica Studio.

Basically, every level and environment starts out as a piece of concept art. Then, a level designer takes a look and builds a basic structure for the area in the game. This is just a set of colored blocks and stuff. Then, the camera team, yes, there’s actually a team of programmers dedicated to the camera system, take a look at the level and place camera positions, some fixed which transition to one another smoothly, and some railed sections. Then, once the camera positions are known, a 3D environment  artist creates all of the necessary assets and objects to make the place look good, considering exactly from which views the scene will be seen.

And what’s cool is that not only does this information allow the designer to know where to cut corners, but it allows them to actually skimp out, believe it or not, on the level of detail. For instance, if the camera is far pulled back from some object, why apply a full HD texture to it which might cause the hardware to struggle. Now, they can tell exactly at which quality to make textures. Or hey, again, if something is far away, give it’s model a smaller triangle count, it’s not as important. That way, assets and models that do appear regularly, like the Kratos character model as well as all of his items, can see an increased triangle count, relative at least to the quality of player character models in other games from the same time.

I mean, so in one of the videos, they go over how the model for this one door was created. So a designer is given some concept art, with it, he makes a low quality model of a door. Next, he moves to some clay-like 3D animation tool which allows him to produce a super high quality version of the same door. I mean, this door is so great, it probably holds more polygons than any scene in the actual game. He then applies good textures to it, makes it looks pretty, and finally, exports a texture from it which he maps back to the lower quality model of the door, which is then the one included in the final game. And this is how every other asset for the game was made too.

That’s bananas!

And not just that, it allows them to pull off some pretty cool visual effects, and the only reason I could tell was because a couple were a little broken. So for instance, lighting is a super complex process, and again, if processing power can be saved there, it means more time to draw more triangles or apply more quality. Since the cameras are preset, there’s no reason to calculate light dynamically, which means all sorts of cheats can be done to create these effects. Like, in this short of a spiral staircase, paying homage to the first game, we can see that the movement of the reflection of fire in the ground isn’t actually related to the fire’s animation itself, but is rather just a prerendered loop. Look, you can see it snap back every once in awhile. Or here, in this scene where the water level rises in a dark room. We can see how the reflection in the water isn’t being applied dynamically, but is rather drawn from a static position, and we see that it doesn’t change while the water comes closer to the edge of the platform.

Another one is in the labyrinth. There’s this hard light cutting through some sort of window casted on the ground. Later though, when a set of spikes pop out from the ground, you realize that they’re not lit by the light, and so it’s actually probably just a texture, not real light.

So this cool automatic and well created camera system not only makes the game easier to follow, but actually serves a technical purpose, and is actually the 3rd freaking step in the development pipeline for any part of the game. The cameras define how everything in the game will look, how the positions of all enemies and puzzle elements will be set. That’s insane, but it’s one of the coolest game things I think I’ve ever learned about.

And on top of this, the camera is used by the developers as a way to disguise guidance. Nobody likes it when games put big flashy markers on maps telling them where to go, and in god of war, none of that is necessary because the camera always subtly points you in the right direction and gives you hints about what to do. What’s funny is that means, when hiding secret treasures for the player to find, the designers aren’t just limited to placing them in hard to reach places, but they can also be tricky and hide them right out of the view of the camera. After a while, you start to be able to tell when that’s happening, and you develop this habit of turning away from the camera in order to collect rewards, which is really funny.

But back to movie games, as, like we said before, a lot of them are dramas, they have to mimic the style of that genre. That means that there’s a lot of close up shots of characters, really showing how bad they can look under certain conditions. Uncanney valley can kind of disconnect you from the characters and be an overall distraction.

This game though, this is an action game. The shots move with the action, the camera gets knocked around. The characters aren’t the focus, the massive set pieces are, so the camera can afford to fly back and take a sweeping look at the scene before it. This happens a good couple of times in the opening scene of the game where you’re literally fighting atop a titan. The camera flies away, but you’re still in control of Kratos, so you see his flaming whips whirling around and dancing in the distance. It’s such a cool effect. This happens again in the fight against kronos who, similarly, you fight atop of. You’re crawling all over his body, getting tossed around, flying from place to place. It’s insane, but it’s so cool. Not only is the game fun to play, and not only does the camera make the action simple to follow for those only accustomed to film, but the game, while being playable, not in a cutscene, is like a spectacle for the player.

Other hack and slash games, for example, Metal Gear Rising, normally are crippled by the fact that the camera needs to be placed directly behind the player at all times. How else are you supposed to be able to execute these precise slices, cutting pieces into little bits like a cheese platter? Sure, it’s cool for someone like you or me maybe, but no one else can follow it because it’s too fast and too complicated. God of War is able to do this though because nothing really requires precision. All of your attacks are these large swipes, visible from even waaaay far away.

Anyways, what I did was prepare a presentation of some of the coolest sections of the game and conducted an interview with my dad, the perfect subject for something like this. He doesn’t know much about games, he’s really into movies, and he’s greek, what more can you get? I try showing him cool new advances in game tech every once in awhile, and while I know he appreciates seeing technology change and advance, I also know that, like many other non-gamers, he can’t always follow normal looking gameplay. This game though, for the first time, I was really able to share with him though, and that’s what makes this cool. It’s not a sappy story between a couple of walking talking collections of stiff polygons and Ellen Page, it’s a fun, sick, bloodfest of a game, and it’s a good time. Anyways, that video will be uploaded separately on my second channel for anyone who’s interested. 


So, the camera gets points for having an actual functional purpose (masking loading times, guiding the player, and allowing for graphical optimizations), and being cool as shit. What more can you ask from in a game?


Not much.


God of War is a game series made by people proud of their craft. It’s been as evident since God of War 1 where beating the game unlocked videos and old character model graveyards featuring messages written by the developers themselves, as it was at the end of the third and final game when a whole mass of special videos detailing every facet of development were made available to the player. Had I not already been interested in pursuing this as a career myself, I think this is the kind of game that would have made me realize that game making is a real job done by real, professional people. And not just that, what impresses me the most is how every relevant field is covered. From artistic work to a whole video about programming that shows clips of actual freaking code, all the way to the visual effects team that fills condoms with fake blood and pops them to produce blood splatters. Finishing the game allows you to see everyone involved in the project, how much fun they had, and how cool it must have been to be on their team.

I’m really disappointed it took me all these years to finally take a look at this game, but I’m so glad I did. The people who made this game unknowingly set the bar, yet to raised, for a genre that barely even existed yet at the time, movie games. I feel like if movie games were more like this, you know, more like actual fun, playable games, I would be into them. I guess all we can do is hope for the future, hope that this pretty lame trend will die out soon, because hope is our greatest strength right? Haha.


Thanks for watching!



Hello and welcome to yet another spongebob video! In case you couldn’t tell, this is an annual thing. Now I know it’s not the game everyone was expecting, but this was based on a movie, SpongeBob SquarePants: Sponge out of water, so I mean technically, it is A movie game, so I mean, let’s blame it on ambiguity? And besides, I’ve had some trouble getting my hands on a copy of the real movie game, weird… Anyways, without further ado, let’s dive right into SpongeBob Hero Pants… wait what? If this game is for the movie, why don’t they have the same title? Haaha we’re already off to an excellent start…

I bought this game a while ago for the PSTV since it was one of the featured PSTV compatible PS VITA games on the store, or in other words, it doesn’t use the Vita’s exclusive touchpads. Tisk Tisk Tisk. I’ve had a lot of difficulties trying to talk about this one in a video. There are a lot of things I have to say about it, but unfortunately most of them are sort of related. I really want to avoid turning this into just me listing off a bunch of things, but at some point it may sound like that.

In my time here, I’ve seen what makes a good and what makes a bad spongebob game. In the end, it mostly comes down to this: respecting, exploiting user’s expectations about, and paying homage to the intellectual property that is spongebob, while simultaneously building a functional, creative, and enjoyable game.

When BigSky interactive made revenge of the flying Dutchman 14 years ago, back when spongebob was in it’s prime, aka all of the old writers were still involved, they failed on both of these fronts. Things in the game were completely different than how they appeared in the show, in some cases even contradictive. I won’t go over everything, but the best example is downtown bikinibottom where the player was met with this awful, dark, weird network of alleyways and a massive apartment complex to climb. Another major disappointment was that through the entirety of the game regardless of what was happening, the player would be treated to the same couple of songs playing continuously. That was because music, rather than being associated to in-game events, was related only to a special costume mechanic, and as a result of both some costumes only being required for individual sections of the game, and one costume in particular, the jelly fishing gear, being required to complete many objectives, the song that played for about 90% of a playthrough was the fishing music. From battling thugs downtown to climbing to the top of a lighthouse in a thunderstorm, the soft playing fishing song was the soundtrack of the game and still haunts my dreams to this day. I catch myself whistling it sometimes, and then I cry. This was a serious offense for a show like spongebob where musical tunes, jingles and themes can be as, if not more expressive than characters.

Now as far as being a game went, The flying Dutchman was buggy (both functionally and in audio-wise), boring, un-inspired, and just. Listen, the game took me 11 years to beat because in one mission you have to catch 100 jellyfish for a contest in jellyfish fields (which doesn’t even look right) and bring them back to this guy, but what they never tell you is that the jellyfish counter resets for every area you go to, and in jellyfish fields there are only actually 84, so I always thought I was missing some and never bothered going back to the guy for the contest, but I didn’t know that he actually counts jellyfish from other areas, so the whole time I had enough and I swear to God I hate this freaking game so much! I hate this game!

Anyways long story short, for these reasons, I concluded that the Flying Dutchman was the worst game ever, for sucking so fundamentally as a game for failing so ridiculously at respecting such a great franchise, spongebob.

Now when Heavy Iron Studios finished their spongebob game, battle for bikini bottom, less than a year after the flying Dutchman released, they excelled in both of these critical areas.

1)
The spongebob brand, the essence of spongebob was represented so well in this game. There were tons of explicit references to moments in the show and familiar elements to any kid who knew a thing or two about spongebob. You had all of the characters from the show, not just the main ones, like, everyone. I mean, when freaking bubble buddy shows up to help you upgrade your bubble attacks, that’s sick. You know that fish news anchor guy from bikini bottom news? He’d show up to commentate on boss battles and give the player hints. See that’s what I’m talking about, they managed to combine a familiar element of the show, to a videogame concept, tutorials and hints. Want another example? When you walked off-stage, your character would eventually get picked up by the giant hand like in that episode when spongebob got sick! And speaking of stages, they actually looked like they were supposed to. See, this is downtown bikinibottom, you recognize it, it looks the way it should. They had a freaking part in rock bottom where when you walk across the street to the candy machine, a short cutscene plays where a bus passes by, just like the freaking show! There was so much attention to detail in this game, and so much freaking respect for spongebob. You can tell that it was made by fans of the show, these people really cared about what they were making. But at the same time, you can tell that they were also trying to make their own product, their own game. All of the enemies, events, and ideas were their own, they just managed to tie spongebob elements to them.

“hmm there should be a sliding mechanic, and every stage will have some sort of slide component. Oh, and spongebob will slide on his tongue, because of course he would”.

All of the enemies, combat, puzzles, and other challenges were entirely their own, and they were clearly and deservingly proud of their work. There are a ton of other great things about that game, so watch last year’s video if you want the full run-down.

The difference is that stripped of that spongebob texture, that layer of spongebob stuff, revenge of the flying Dutchman is a total piece of trash, but battle for bikini bottom is still an excellent and creative 3D platformer.


HERO PANTS

So the game that this video is actually about, the game brought to you by the people who make you a new call of duty every couple of years, the people who behind the Grinch who stole Christmas for the playstation (which side note, would have probably ruined any kid’s Christmas I mean come one), and the engine responsible for basically all of the smart phone VR games right now, SpongeBob Hero Pants,  where does it stand? Can we use these two criteria to evaluate it? Sure, we’ll try at least.

First, a quick explanation. Spongebob Hero Pants is a 3D platformer action game where you progress linearly through levels and collect various types of items. Each level features a mix of combat and light puzzle solving (which at its most complicated, boils down to playing simon says with a set of colored buttons). The player can play as all of the characters from the movie, and after charging up a special meter, each character can turn into their superhero form for a limited time where they’re granted faster movement speed, higher jumps, and some sort of projectile attack. You do this for 15 levels spanning 3 areas, and that’s it. That’s the jist of the game.

The problem is, before you actually get the opportunity to be treated to all of this, and just after being greeted by the lowest resolution splash screen image I have ever seen, the game presents to you, the worst main menu in the history of games. It might not seem like much, but it’s that bad!

[talk about main menu crap]

First of all, the music that plays is just that generic spongebob music, like, ripped directly from the show. Problem is, this isn’t any old spongebob game, in this one you play as SUPER HEROES! That’s the main gimmick! Couldn't they have played some better fitting music for that? Like something from the actual movie? I mean look at squidwards face here, look how serious he looks, but listen to how dumb this sounds,

So then you get to the actual menu, and right away you can tell how bad of a game this is going to be because a whole button is dedicated to nothing more than opening the legal page. This was the first time this game threw me into total disbelief, and absolutely not the last. I mean, so the way a MENU works (I can’t believe I’m saying this, who’s this video for 2 year olds!? muffled) is that you have various options in a list which, when selected, do something. When it comes to games, they can either launch certain sections or take you to some other special menu or screen. You know how the legal page or the eula should be accessed? Just like everything else! You go to it, you select it, and that’s it. WHY is an entire button on my controller devoted to nothing else but OPENING A FREAKING LEGAL PAGE!? Holy crap it’s like they're trying to cover themselves from being sued for all the PTSD this game’s going to induce right from the get-go. You know what it takes to start a game? You have to identify and navigate to either the New Game or Continue, then note the little instruction telling you to use the X button to select, then press the button, and voila. THAT’s more steps than it takes to get to the legal section HOLY crap HOW THE HECK does accessing a legal section take precedence over starting the actual freaking crap game!? My God there must be some really valuable information in this stuff.

Oh I found it, here we go: “you (that’s me) will not use the product for any purposes prohibited by United States law, including without limitation, the development, design, manufacture or production of nuclear missiles, or chemical or biological weapons”. Geeze, good thing they included that message, because the first thing I always think when I try to build weapons of mass destruction is how I’m going to incorporate a FUCKING SPONGEBOB GAME INTO THEIR DESIGN! HOLY SHIT! I CAN’T BELIEVE THIS!

But like, just the fact that the instructions for SELECT and Legal are grouped together baffles me. I can’t believe I’m actually about to apply knowledge from a UI course, but structure in a user interface needs to have meaning, it can’t just be a means of de-cluttering. Things with similar functions needs to be grouped together, but SELECTION with the X button is something that can be invoked on all of the options, whereas LEGAL with the triangle button just opens the same legal page. I actually questioned for a minute whether each sub-menu or possible selection had it’s own legal page, which they don’t. So pressing TRIANGLE at any point in the menu opens the same legal page. I can’t believe it.

And the fun doesn’t stop there OOOOOH NO! In some of the sub menus, for some reason moving the selection just stops making sounds. Like, it makes sounds here, but it doesn’t make sound here. Why? How, what, how could anyone mess that up.

I honestly can’t believe this I have whole page of notes and I’m still at the main menu! I already hate this game!
So then after watching a dumb cutscene and waiting through a ridiculously long loading screen, in the context of a spongebob game at least, which could have just been running in the background while that cutscene ran but WHATEVER, finally, the game begins.


The first thing to notice is that the game looks like absolute crap. The game features ZERO ATTENTION to detail, and I wish they had printed that on the back of the box. I can honestly say, I have never seen a game with an actual budget look this awful. I’m on the first screen and things are stretching in and out of existence.

The performance is awful too. Like, when you turn into the super hero mode for the first time, a short clip plays, but when you activate it, you see it happen for a split second, then the clip plays, then you come back, it’s so bad.

So just like any other platformer, you have ground that you can stand on, and pits. Problem is in any other game developed by people with actual brains, they would come up with some smart way to distinguish between the two. Maybe make the ground ridiculously far away beneath the platforms, or put spikes on it, or just don’t show it, whatever. But what did they do here? NOTHING! The PITS look like normal ground, so excuse me for thinking I could stand on that rock over there, god. In one level, they actually put like bomb things outside of the level, so I thought oh yes finally I can kill myself, but of course not, you just pass right through them and fall. But then some of the decorations outside the stage, you do actually collide with, so it makes no sense and it’s not even consistent with itself. But the worst part is, you don’t even die as soon as you touch the ground or anything, so most of the time you pass through it for a bit before you spawn back, and the rest of the time you fall straight through it for a good minute before you die. ARE YOU FEELING IT NOW MR KRABS! But then you also have moments like this, where FOR SOME REASON you can actually walk over the void. Problem, when you do finally fall off and die, you automatically get reset to the last position you were standing at, which in this case, is the middle of nowhere and from where you can’t get back to the normal level. AND THE WORST PART is guess how I got here? I was following a trail of coins! The game guided me into this. In reality you’re supposed to stretch a bridge here, but I didn’t know that, tried the jump, and got stuck. My only way out was to die, which isn’t even easy since the characters have so much freaking health for no reason! And sometimes the ground isn’t even connected to the platforms, and it just looks like crap.

But speaking of falling, you know what happens when you actually die from falling? A little death animation is triggered, and you respawn back at some checkpoint. But would you like to guess the order of those events? IT’S BACKWARDS! You spawn back at some safe space, the character does this little death thing, and then he goes right back to normal. I I… It’s like these little details that we take advantage of in games, you know, we don’t realize how much they matter until a game like this comes along and breaks us.

Anyways, so I took a graphics course this past semester, and now I have a great deal of respect for the field because it was the hardest thing I think I’ve ever experienced, and I’m also able to put names to some of the graphical bugs and issues now.

So one thing all games have to come up with a serious solution for are shadows. One way of doing it, especially for non-complex or realistic shadows on moving characters, is by building a shadow polygon. Here, the shadow isn’t actually like a burnt in texture or anything, it’s actually a small dark shape, here a circle, with maybe some transparency. That’s how a lot of early 3D games handled it, and it’s always been important for helping players land jumps, using that small black circle as a sort of indicator of their positions over the ground.

So this game features a shadow polygon, which is completely fine. I would have no problem with it if it worked, but it doesn’t. So sometimes you walk over these tiny ledges around the levels, these tiny little shifts in elevation, and what does the shadow polygon do? It tilts sideways to match the slope of the edge! WHAT!? Why WHAT? Why would they do that? Why would they make it do that? Why not just grab the highest height? I mean it’ll still look bad, but not as bad as having a dark shadow jut out of the ground like that, come on!

And then there’s these plants and barnacles or whatever which serve no actual purpose, but for some reason you’re able to stand on them. And when you do, ooooh man when you do, does that shadow look good. Oh yeah, exactly what I wanted to see. These sorts of things just break the realism, even in a game like this. When shadows stop working, you realize how poorly made this game is, and it’s just, it’s junk.

But at least the polygon isn’t fundamentally broken or anything, right? I mean, it’s not like it actually clips through SQUIDWARD’s FEET, at least these people got something right? Right? Oh, of course not.

There is zero, absolutely NO attention to detail. I mean, look. This is the first level and here’s a piece of seaweed placed outside of the ground, just floating off in the air. These sorts of items and assets aren’t placed by some sort of algorithm, I can guarantee that. They’re placed by artists and designers. People sit down and place these objects around the game world. So you know what this means? It means two things. 1) Some guy put plant in the middle of nowhere, and never remembered to delete it. And 2), this game was very, very poorly tested, if at all. Back when I was a game QA tester in college, one of the things I noticed with a lot of games was that our manual testing really only ever covered the first levels or sections. That was because testing builds rarely ever came with tools to allow us to navigate throughout scenarios or control pieces of the game. They would give us a build at the start of a shift, we would start testing, starting a fresh game because that’s all we could do, and then halfway through they would give us a new build and tell us to test that instead, which forced us to restart and left almost half of the game untested. All that’s to say that generally, the first level of any game is the best tested, and the fact that such a dumb and silly mistake is present indicates to me that no one way paying attention.

That’s how you sum up this game, zero thought process put into anything. Hey how come coins are on, like, the back edge of these platforms? Why aren’t they centered along their length like they would be in any other game? Or hey, let’s build this mechanic where after charging a meter, the player can turn into a super hero for a short amount of time, but for some reason, rather than having that meter charge when you actually interact with the game, like by collecting coins or fighting enemies, let’s just make it recharge automatically, so the player just has to wait around until they can use it.

Anyways there are a couple of other graphical things I wanted to address. So clipping, it’s when two things intersect with each other, and it happens in a lot of games, but in this one, everything clips with everything. Enemies clip through platforms, you clip through platforms, freaking platforms and land masses clip through each other, coins clip through each other, and platforms. It’s bananas. Oh wait, this is candy dessert world or whatever, the floor is a cake. It’s probably actually just a vasilopita, aaaah I get it now.

One of the worst offenders in these platforms where we can observe Zfighting. You ever played a game and saw something where two surfaces seem to intersect with each other and it looks like they’re cutting in and out as you look at them? That’s called Zfighting because, at those points, two fragments have the same or very similar Z depth values, or distance from the camera, and depending on that distance as well as some camera properties, the system might be unable to determine which surface to draw at each fragment, and so you get that choppyness. So at one point in this game, I came across a couple of platforms that were all Zfighting with each other, and first I was disappointed because this is a game that came out in 2015 and cost me $50, but then I got angry because I realized there was no reason for any of these platforms to be placed in such a way that they overlapped anyways. What they were trying to do was build a really big platform, so what they did was take 4 small platforms and stuck them into one another. That’s dumb. What they should have done was just take one small platform, and straight up scale it to the size they needed, that’s it. There’s no excuse for this, this dumb, ridiculous junk, and it almost feels like no one involved understood anything about computer graphics. I mean I took a single course for one semester, and that was enough for me to suggest a solution. And it’s not even the only place it happens, there are a couple of sections where it’s clear to see that this technique, just sticking things together, is how they built the majority of the levels. This sort of practice abstracts game development so well, it becomes more comparable to building blocks that it is to actual development, and I don’t know about you, but if I were a project manager, I wouldn’t pay my employees developer salaries for playing with blocks all day. These people are supposed to be professionals. You know what, it wouldn’t be such a big deal if it cost 10, maybe even 20 bucks, I probably wouldn't care, but this is a full priced game, and this is ridiculous.

Something else that really disappointed me was character dialogue. Unlike the other games where the character’s shorts lines were always contextually specific, in this game, characters just keep talking all the time and never shut up. I’m standing still spongebob won’t stop blurting out this random, annoying garbage. (walking shoes…?) WHAT ARE YOU TALKING ABOUT!? You’re not moving! I started to get sick of this after about 2 minutes.

But on top of these random bits, the game also features contextual lines. The problem is, they repeat indefinitely throughout the level. For instance, each character has a line for when they encounter a certain type of enemy. This line will play, no matter how many times this enemy has been encountered. The worst is the heart huggers. I’ve heard spongebob, hundreds of times, announce in total surprise OH IT’S A HEART HUGGER. And then follow up by explaining its behavior. I understand that this may have been important to express to the player one, but listening to it over and over and over again is absurd! Or another one is when the super hero meter fills up, the character will announce it to the player, also explaining to them how it only lasts for a limited amount of time. You’d think by the last level spongebob would understand that I KNOW IT DOESN’T LAST LONG! BUT HE KEEPS TELLING ME! And worst, absolute worst of all, and you’re honestly not even going to believe this, but this is the first sound you hear at the beginning of every level, because when you start a level, the meter is already maxed out. Every single level, begins with I’M READY TO BE A SUPER HERO! It’s like, it’s like a sick joke. This game is so bad, I can’t believe it.

But enough about the beyond awful aesthetics and mood breaking dialogue, let’s talk about the actual gameplay!

[talk about how bad character switching is, and how spongebob is the only worthwhile one]

So like I said at the beginning, one of the things I thought would be cool about the game was how you could play as all of the different characters. The thing is though, it never explains how to switch characters. After starting a game where I picked spongebob, I assumed I would be able to make another choice at the end of a level maybe, but once it ended, and after I accidentally skipped through an upgrade screen because X now is no longer select, but rather, leave, and you have to use a different button to actually purchase your upgrades, god these menus just keep getting worse, the game simply loaded the next level, spongebob informed me he was ready to become a super hero, and that was it.

To switch characters, you actually have to quit the game, restart it, continue, and then select a new one. Which is easier said than done, because the game likes to crash a lot. So I did this, and I played at least one stage as each character, but I realized something very quickly: none of them were as good as spongebob. You see, every character’s normal mode is the same, you have attacks and you can throw this grenade burgers, but when you turn into a super hero, you gain a new, special, projectile attack. Spongebob’s are these bubbles that automatically lock onto enemies and knock them out. The great thing about it is that you can fire it as fast as your finger can press the button, which looks dumb but makes it super powerful, but also, you can fire it while running, jumping, and even attacking. Now guess what I’m going to say… No other character can do this. I started with patrick and realized that his ice cream launching attack was slower than spongebob’s, caused him to pause for a considerably long amount of time, and could not be fired while multitasking. I found that weird, but continued on. Squidward’s, similarly, required him to be grounded and fired much more slowly than spongebob’s, meaning it could only really be used effectively against a single enemy at a time, but more effective than patrick’s. At least he was cool because his running animation looked like Solid Snake. Then Mr Krabs, he had this guided missile thing, but it was ridiculously slow, and didn’t seem to cause any more damage than anything else. Then Sandy, I mean, she fired quickly, but she still could only fire from a stationary position, and what’s the benefit of rapid fire if enemies only take 1 or 2 hits to kill anyways? And while we’re on her, like, the only reason the joke about her turning into an actual squirrel worked in the movie was because they were actually on land, but now she’s underwater, but whatever.  And then finally, plankton, his move was pretty much identical to squidward’s, and his walking sound wasn’t in sync with his actually walking animation, which pissed me off. So yeah, the game features 6 characters, but only 1 is worth a crap, because the others are literally less effective than him. It’s like they took a page from the book of the flying dutchman where only one costume was really useful, and rather than that meaning the music would suck for the entire duration of play, now we’re just stuck with these terrible, freaking aggravating spongebob lines.

“It vanished, like a bad dream”
I’m starting to feel like this game is just a bad dream. Oh no, it’s not, it’s just bad.

This makes even less sense considering the xbox360 version of this game included local multiplayer. That sucks. So player 1 plays as spongebob while player 2 plays with a handicap? That’s unfair.

So if all of the characters bar spongebob are definitively less useful than spongebob, what’s the point? Well, some levels have these special walls that can only be broken by certain characters, so if you actually care about what’s on the other side, you can replay the level as the appropriate character to figure it out. Problem, some levels have a couple of these special walls, and frankly the only thing I’d be interested in finding behind them is a better game, but dreams don’t come true, so forget it.

But is game still fun? Is it at least a good platformer? Well let me ask you this, do you think waiting for an elevator is fun? Because if so, you’d love this game. I mean, the platforming is basic, you hope from one ledge to the next. The most complicated it gets is when moving platforms are introduced, and when I say moving whooooahoa hoa do these things get going. They move so fast you can’t even jump around on them reliably without losing the floor beneath you, because their movement speed is identical to yours, and since the game doesn’t feature momentum, if you jump in any direction other than the direction the platform is moving in, you’ll start to fall behind. At one point they introduced a faster moving platform, and I honestly could not understand why. But what sucks is that a lot of the time you just miss them, so you’re stuck waiting there until it comes back. And then even when you do get on it, you can’t rely on it to actually take you somewhere safely because collision detection is whack and just seems to stop working every once in a while! (clip of mr krabs falling through an elevator)

I mean at one point they even include a button that disables collisions, what a great idea. No but for real, in this part, you were supposed to go down this thing, press a button to open a thing, then launch yourself back up and press a new button to raise the floor. What goes wrong is that when large platforms like this move, you can no longer collide with them, so when I tried to walk on it WHILE it was moving, I fell right through it and got stuck in an area that I wasn’t supposed to be in, and where it was impossible for me to recover from, forcing me to kill myself and try again. What I obviously was supposed to do was wait for the thing to move, then jump onto it. But hey what does it matter right? The game crashed after I beat that level anyways, and I had to do it all over again.

So buttons are something that appear all over the game, and I tried honestly to try to justify some of their necessities, but I wasn’t able to. Buttons often, at least for the first half of the game, really only affect terrain. Like, they rotate a thing, open a bridge, or just in one way or another, create a path for the player to continue. The issue is that none of the buttons are actually challenging to get to. It’s not like you have to fight off enemies to get to them or anything, most of the time you just walk into a new area, see a button, press it, a path opens, and you move on. In that case, these button triggered events could have just as easily, and more effectively been controlled by an auto trigger based on the player’s current position. I can’t believe I’m complaining about buttons but I’m complaining about buttons.

There are, as you can imagine, buttons later in the game that require you to place an object on them for a door or path to stay open, but again, none of these buttons are particularly challenging to get to, so there’s no reason they couldn’t have just been one time presses. It get’s worse though because pushing the blocks or cupcakes takes forever, and sometimes I found myself going into superhero mode just to be able to push them faster. Cupcakes in particular though are really hard to move because, unlike blocks, you can accidentally slide around them and push them in different directions. In candy world, eventually you get these puzzles where you have to get the cupcake to switch floors by using an elevator, most of the time, it’s a matter of bringing them down a level. For a long time, I actually did the whole thing, placing them on the elevator, going to the switch, hitting the switch, and then moving the cupcake to where I needed it to go. I realized later though that you can actually just push the cupcake straight off the edge, so what’s the point?

So other than these, what sorts of platforming challenges exist? Well there’s these sections with bouncing pads like clams or gulp… jellyfish. Sometimes they rotate and stuff, so I assumed you had to wait until they were facing the direction you want to be launched, but after a few mess ups, I noticed it didn’t even matter.

So at this point, we’ve established that this adventure action platformer looks like crap, sounds like crap, and mostly plays like crap. There’s really just one thing we haven’t talked about yet, and that’s combat.

[COMBAT]

Combat is in this game is extremely basic. You press one button for physical attacks, and one for projectiles. You can actually upgrade your physical attacks to have this combo thing, but even without it you can attack really fast. Most enemies just come straight at you, and by spamming the attack button, you can deal with most of them.

There aren’t many enemy types, and most of them have the same behavior, just different appearances, for example the spatulas which in the stone age section of the game, become (cough) primitive spatulas, and later in the dessert world, become lollipops, even though everyone keeps referring to them as popsicles.

The thing is, the premise of the game is that someone has that book from the movie that creates anything written into it, and they’re creating all of these bad guys and stuff. With that as the story, it’s a little disappointing how uninspired the enemies are. Especially since half of them aren’t even creative at all, they’re just plankton’s, even though plankton is actually a good guy in this game.

None of them have any special or interesting behavior, and none of them force the player to think outside the box like in battle for bikini bottom where you had some enemies which could only be struck from one direction or another. Once you get the super charge time upgrade, combat barely even matters anymore, you just walk in and spam your bubble move until you win. And and hold up. Like, I don’t know why, but like, so when you kill an enemy with the bubble move, they get caught in a bubble and float away, but for some reason this one type of robot guy just expands like crazy whenever he gets put into a bubble. I don’t know why, it’s not like anything else about him changes. He just scales waaaay up, just, out of the blue. I swear, zero, I repeat, zero attention to detail.

Enemies sometimes spawn in waves, and you have to beat all of them to progress, but there isn’t even a spawn animation or effect, so they literally just pop into existence, and sometimes the designers throw so many of them into an area either on or off-screen that the frame rate dips to seizure inducing levels. Now you’re not even just fighting to beat the game, you’re legitimately scared, you’ve gotta take these guys out to ease the load on your console or else it’ll probably fry itself trying to render so much crap. Quite an experience to live at the limit of your clock speed, isn’t it?

Combat becomes really difficult once you realize that there’s no damage reaction animation. When you take a hit, your health bar goes down, but your character doesn’t respond to it. There’s so little feedback in this game, you can hardly tell what’s going on.

There’s this one enemy type, this satelite station guy, he has a target marker that follows you around a certain area, and if it locks on, he’ll launch some sort of thing at you. Pretty cool idea at first, until you realize just how freaking incompetent the people who made it are. So the target, you know how they made it work? When it meets you, it moves around a 2D plane on the ground and follows your position. That’s all fine and dandy sure, that is until some decided to put one of these target enemies on an inclined surface, the top of a hill, and now that target moving along a plane actually freaking intersects with the ground. This, this right here, I think this is one of the funniest screw-ups I have ever seen in a game. Like, they didn’t try to hide it. I just want to know how someone justified putting a couple of these enemies in places like this weird their markers are able to clip through the level, or if the level designer even knew how these guys work. Like, come one. I, cannot, believe this. How did this get passed anyone? How does this game cost $50? These are the questions that keep me up at night. This, this isn’t even funny, and it’s not even just bad, it’s really depressing at this point.

In the prehistoric section, these enemies become volcanos, but something’s wrong because sometimes they don’t actually render properly, I know it’s hard to see, but they’re actually invisible. (badum tss)

Ummm, at one point there’s a boss fight against, of all the possible creative things they could have come up with, what do you think it is? Of course a plankton robot. This was the level I tried out Sandy, and it turned out to be super easy since the nut launcher locks onto enemies and fires super fast. This is probably the one and only section in the game where someone other than spongebob might be most useful, but I wouldn’t actually know, I’m not going to waste my time trying.
There’s another part later where you run away from a giant squidward dinosaur. Not very exciting, and it looks like he even T-poses at the end, but again, I’m not going to try again to find out.

There’s also, like, this weird section with a patrick dinosaur. It’s pretty messed up. I think the idea is that you’re supposed to hit all of the buttons while he tried to turn them off. You’re supposed to be careful because of the spikes, but if you have all of the health upgrades by this point, it doesn’t even matter. It is pretty messed up though, and as far and as far as I can tell, this isn’t something from spongebob, like, this was an original creation thought up and built specifically for this game. Now I know why everything else sucks, all the budget was poured into this!


The final section of the game takes place in this candy world thing I’ve mentioned a couple of times, but what I haven’t mentioned is that this area is actually supposed to be the inside of spongebob’s mind. It’s just candy. Cake, cookies, candy, lollipops, hearts, cupcakes, all this crap, that’s it, that’s what’s in spongebob’s mind. It gets me thinking about Battle for bikini bottom’s level in spongebob’s mind, which was executed so much better. There you could even go into other people’s dreams, just like the show, and each one felt unique and properly designed based on the character. In comparison, this is just a joke, a quick idea and easy setting to end the game. Oh cool, now instead of mountains of sand and dirt, I’m jumping on french waffles, clearly this game is preparing me for a climactic ending. No, just no. This doesn’t look like spongebob, it doesn’t feel like spongebob, and it’s not even an interesting setting.

I’m starting to get it now, why they had that warning at the beginning of the game. This isn’t a game, it’s a torture weapon! Buying this crap for your kid isn’t just bad parenting, it’s a freaking war crime! Fuck! Holy Shit!

Hey, but at least the lollipops are having fun!

At the end, it turns out it was spongebob the whole time! Or something? Like, spongebob was in a dream? Or, idk, whatever. Then the game makes fun of you for not 100%ing it, and tells you to go back and finish collecting all of the pages.

[clip of giving the game the finger]


This game, this game broke me. Look, revenge of the flying dutchman was bad, it was so bad it took me over a decade to finish it, but this, god, I would be lying if I said I didn’t think it was as bad, or worse. If I thought that game was bad for not appropriately taking advantage of elements from the spongebob franchise, than I have to admit this this one handled it even worse. There’s only two points in which you see any familiar buildings, and you can’t even reach them or do anything about it. But at the same time, spongebob today is not what it used to be. The show used to have some seriously good writers, but now it’s been dumbed down to this gross cringefest of a cartoon. 

So considering what spongebob was when the flying dutchman came out, and what spongebob is now when hero pants came out, while I can say that they are both offenders when it comes to representing the show properly as a game, I can’t really tell if the penalty for the offense is equivalent for both of them.

But go back to what I said before when I compared revenge of the flying dutchman and battle for bikini bottom. Strip both of these games down to their core, remove that layer of spongebob from them. Sure, flying dutchman might be total trash and yeah it might include a couple of logical inconsistencies and bugs, but it’s still a semi-functional collectathon game.

Hero pants, on the other hand, doesn’t even meet the minimum standards any full priced game should. It has big bright and dumb graphical issues, irrelevant character selections, broken collision detection, uncertain pits, infinite pits, boring and pointless puzzles, dull combat, easily abused combat mechanics, I never even mentioned this, but no alternative styles of play to break up the monotonous platforming, and the absolute worst menu system ever developed, all wrapped and held together with, you guessed it, ZERO ATTENTION TO DETAIL and a 50 fucking dollar price tag. I can’t believe it!

I’m pissed, and I want my money back.

Yeah, flying dutchman and I had a beef for a long time, and yeah, I said that in my opinion it’s the worst game of all time, but if right now, I was forced to play either one of these two games again, I would pick that freaking ghastly game up in a heartbeat.

I’m done with this, I can’t, this was crap.

And with that, I conclude this video about Hero pants. I hope you enjoyed it, because I certainly didn’t. Maybe I should’ve just played the movie game, probably better for my blood pressure.

Thanks for watching!


[intro about road to MGSV]

You know what’s a great game? ZombiU. It’s a shame that it wasn’t profitable, and that we probably won’t see anything like it ever again, and today I’m going to explain to you why.

So ZombiU was one of the WiiUs launch titles, a Ubisoft developed game exclusively on a Nintendo console that wasn’t rabbids and was actually, just, a whole new thing. In my opinion, this is one of the best zombie games ever made, and one of the only zombie games that’s actually earned that horror part in survival-horror.

So what’s the game about? Well, you play as some random survivor of a zombie apocalypse in london. There is some weird plot with an oddly out of place assasin’s creed level of historical conspiracy, but it doesn’t matter. The game’s story really only serves as a way to force the player to explore different areas and interact with the game’s various mechanics. And that’s the game’s real point. It’s a pseudo open-world where you can do whatever you want, to a certain extent, and make up your own story. It’s a zombie apocalypse, the idea is to survive. Yeah there’s some guy telling you where to go every once in awhile, but listening to him brings you to new places where you find new things, and at the end of the day his advice is useful, so it’s alright.

So the game is about survival and horror, and every single feature seems to have been built with those two themes in mind.

The one thing you’ve probably heard about the game, even if you haven’t played it, is how it handles player deaths. Like I said, this isn’t really a story driven game, so a standard game-over screen with restart or checkpoint options isn’t a requirement. The developers realized that, and came up with a more valuable and domain specific implementation of a death system. When you die, you get reset at the safehouse as a new random survivor who has a different appearance and may have different skills, your survival time goes back to 0, and you lose all of your equipment. If though, your previous character didn’t just die anyway, but was bitten by a zombie, which is an instant kill because these are really classical zombies which is great, then your previous self will actually remain where you lost them, but as a zombie. So returning to where you last died and hunting down your old character allows you to recover your lost gear.

Now some people might like to compare this technique to darksouls where you lose your souls on every death and can go back to collect them. There’s one major difference between these two games though: in dark souls, you’re always dying, whereas in zombiU, you actually die pretty rarely. It’s not like the game is going out of it’s way to be super challenging or anything, you really just die a standard amount of times. But when you do die, you lose everything, making it much more difficult to actually get back to where you left off. This influences your playstyle. When you’re walking around the safe house or large open areas, you progress pretty quickly, not afraid to explore every nook and cranny. When you enter a small space though, a tiny building with zombies down every corridor, you slow down, you get nervous, you get scared. We saw the survival part of the death system, but now we get a taste of the horror part. This is how it would be in real life, but games have always had trouble getting that across or getting players to express that in their behavior. Most horror games we play have little or no consequences for dying, so we just try and try again until we get it. Here though, as a player, a section like this freaks the crap out of you. You know you need to go further, but you know there’s a high risk you’ll die. If that happens, you can’t just restart and try again, because actually making it to this building is too difficult without all of the gear you had. And even if you do make it, you still have to manage to kill the whole horde of zombies that your previous survivor is now a part of before you can pick back up all of your stuff. You can alternatively spend a couple of hours revisiting places you’ve already been, hoping to find enough new guns and gear to get back to where you were, but even that presents a risk because you might die while searching, and if that happens or if it takes too long, by the time you get back to where you had to be, your old zombie self might not even be around anymore, and new zombies might have populated the building.

This super simple, fantastic death system for a zombie games sticks with you, worries you,  and influences every decision you make. For example, one of the first times I had played, I found a hallway with a couple of zombies hanging around that hadn’t spotted me, and I started to come up with a plan to take them out. I could run in and shoot them, but that would leave me with very little ammo left which I might need for later. I had recently found a landmine in some munitions box though, and I thought maybe I could use it. Problem was, I didn’t know how it worked, you know, I’m just a normal survivor, and I was afraid I might use it improperly. I ended up deciding to use it though, I thought it would be safer. I tried sneaking up on them, but one of them spotted me. I didn’t have time to pull out a gun, so I dropped the mine and tried running away, but the zombie triggered the mine before I could get clear, and it took me down with it. The death system freaked me out, it stressed me to a point that I made a bad decision. I tried preserving equipment and ammo for long term-survival by using something I didn’t know the function of, which got me killed. At least I was able to return pretty quickly and pick up my stuff off the un-zombified corpse, so in the end, it actually wasn’t so bad. All I lost was my character and a single landmine, everything else was salvageable.

But even that, I mean, sometimes you start to grow fond of your characters. Like at one point, I managed to play as this special forces guy. He was wearing camouflage, he had great stats, and I managed to keep him alive for the majority of my play through. I had grown attached to this guy, he was my favorite character so far. At one point, I had to go through this dark sewer like area. There were a lot of zombies, so I turned my flashlight off in order to stay hidden. What I didn’t know though was that one of the zombies in front of me was a firefighter and had some sort of tank on his back. When I took him out, the tank exploded, blowing me up along with it. It made me so upset. This guy had survived through all of these different trials, taken out tons of zombies, collected all sorts of gear, and finally such a stupid mistake got him killed.

But see, just the fact that I can tell these sorts of stories about a game is amazing. How many other games can you do that with? Tell stories just like they happened to you? Not so many. Every single move you make in this game is well thought out by you, the player. You never act mindlessly, you’re too on-edge, and the game never tells you what to do. It’s up to you, and it takes a while sometimes, and it’s all because of the death system.

Like the part where you find another’s survivor’s booby traps. He placed a ton of explosives all over a field, and you have to decide what to do. Do you just walk passed them and move on? Maybe you can use them as a trap for the zombies later, you know, lead them into the mine field and get them all killed without wasting any of your own resources. But hmmm, maybe you’ll mess up and blow one up yourself, that would such. So do you detonate them all from a safe distance away? Make the area safe to walk? But that’s a lot of explosions, maybe it’ll attract a bunch of zombies. Now you won’t have just wasted a ton of bullets shooting up the mines, but you’ll have to kill all of the zombies that come pouring out of the walls. Or maybe you can just walk passed them and not go back, try your best to keep pushing forward and not have to accidentally step back into the mines. Every player will have to make a different decision here, and nobody's there to help them.

So far we’ve talked about just one feature, death, and we’ve already seen how great of an experience it can give the player, and hopefully you’ve realized how much replay value it adds to the game.

So remember how the Last of Us had two main modes of gameplay: exploration and combat+sneaking? Remember how dumb that was? That you just kind of walk around at a slow pace, looking at stuff and collecting things until suddenly your running animation changes and you move quicker and you realize uh oh I guess I’m supposed to be fighting bad guys now or something. I hope you do, because that was dumb. No survival horror game should be able to get away with that, having survival and horror, exploration fighting, be presented scenario by scenario in mutual exclusion. You shouldn’t be able to look at the game and go “oh okay, in this part I’m supposed to relax and look for scissors on the ground” and then at the next part go “oh okay, now I’m supposed to pull out my gun and shoot things”. No. These events should be sprinkled around loosely, and you should absolutely not have different behavior available while performing these two actions. The game should feel fluid, transitions shouldn’t be so hard like that, you should always have access to all of your abilities.

Few, anyways.

ZombiU doesn’t do any of that bullshit. You’re not sometimes surviving and sometimes fighting, you are always in survival and horror modes. You wanna stop and rummage through a drawer, open up a box or search a body for stuff? Okay, but you’re going to have to put your bag down on the floor, look away from your TV screen to manage your inventory on the gamepad screen, and hope that no zombies sneak up on you while you’re busy. Collecting, healing yourself, switching weapons or items, and managing inventory are more survival related tasks, but are now tied directly to combat. You can’t pause the game, the zombies are always after you. If you want to patch yourself up or pick up a new item, you’ve gotta get a safe distance away, make sure you’re clear, or just try to fight your way to safety. This again, slows you down, forces you to think. You can only take a couple of swipes before you die, and if you’re distracted, a single bite will kill you. So you’re never interacting with survival and combat mechanics in isolation, you’re always doing both.

I mean even when it comes to selecting items to take with you. You have a backpack that you can upgrade, but even it max size it can’t carry all that much. You have a bin at the safe house, but even it can’t hold everything. At any point, you generally only ever have one extra clip for each type of gun, which might not even be full. To take a gun into the field, you need to take it and the ammo for it. Already two slots are being used up. If you’re feeling good, you can take the crossbow with just a single bolt and try to recover it after every shot, but if you miss or the bolt breaks, now you have a whole wasted slot. You also only have 6 quick select slots on the gamepad, items that you can switch to without having to put the bag down, but which still take a while to pull out. Two are reserved for your flashlight and cricket bat, which let’s be honest, is the best melee weapon for a british zombie apocalypse. So you’ve got 4 left, and the 4 you choose will dictate your strategy. Maybe I’ll hold my pistol for general use, a shot gun for when they come too close, my rifle for when I wanna take one out from afar, and a flare to distract them. Oh but wait. Maybe I could use a flare to distract them, and then toss in a molotov cocktail to burn them all up. Hmmm, so which gun do I swap for the bottle? Or what about a grenade instead? Or hey, what if I just use my cross bow and landmines or something. Try taking them out silently, and plant a mine if they spot me? You have all of these strategies available, and every player will choose their own strategies based on the challenge ahead and their own preferences and skills. That’s great.

Another important tool is the prepper pad. It’s basically a gamepad like thing that you can use to scan walls, containers, zombies and more. I thought it might ruin the experience to scan a group of zombies to see if any of them actually have any important or useful items on them before deciding whether or not to engage them, but it doesn’t really, it forces you to progress even more slowly. It does bother me that it marks them on your map, I thought that was dumb, but hey, the game’s not perfect.

One of the most critical functions of the pad is the radar, my absolute favorite thing about it is how one of the first things the game teaches you is not to trust the radar. By tapping the gamepad screen which shows a map (if you’ve activated the CCTV box in that area), the radar is activated and enemies within it’s range are detected and displayed temporarily. What’s great is that it only shows them for a short while, and it’s not like a live feed or something, you have have to sit still and monitor your radar to get a sense of which points are on the move and which are just standing around.

Something you learn pretty early on is that the radar will pick up things other than zombies, like birds or rats, but most of the time you can tell which is which, because animals will move around a lot faster, and generally run away from you whereas zombies move towards you.

So there’s this one section which I think is probably the best part of the entire game, and possibly one of my favorite sections of not just any horror game, but maybe any game ever.

To get gas from one guy, you need to get medicine or something for him. To get it, you have to go to a daycare building. The place is absolutely infested with zombies, and it’s, at this point, the smallest and most complicated structure you’ve seen. You don’t really know where you’re going, so you just start exploring, checking every room, cautiously killing zombies as you move forward, updating your sense of the area by tapping your radar every once in a while (being extremely careful since you don’t actually have the full map of the building yet), it’s a slow process, and it strains your nerves. Eventually, the game starts playing weird, creepy sounds. I didn’t expect this, and it scared out of me, but it’s welcome. Between that, listening to these recorded messages left behind by the nursery staff, and just taking in these phenomenal visuals, you soon start to get this feeling of dread. Then, after hitting your radar screen, you see it.  A massive cluster of heat signatures, larger than you’ve ever seen before. They’re in a room you can’t really get to yet, but your radar reaches it, so you keep hearing them ping. You move around, check out other places, but are constantly reminded of them in that room. You start thinking about them. I mean crap, you’ve never seen that many in a room before. Maybe, I mean, they can’t be zombies, maybe it’s rats or something. You keep going, you keep thinking. Then you see something weird, something you’ve never seen before. Alright, so now your thoughts are all over the place. (ping) Okay, something weird is going on (ping) that’s a lot of points (ping) maybe it’s just rats (ping) maybe it’s zombies (ping) or maybe… (ping) it’s something else… (ping)

(open door)

It’s only rats. The game builds you up, your heart’s been pounding, you’re terrified, you’re scared, you have no idea what’s going on. And just like that, it’s nothing, just a bunch of rats that scurry away. The developers created that situation, they designed the experience you just had. But is it over? Are they done playing with you?

Now that everything’s fine, that you’re calm, that your guard is waaay down, they finally hit you with it. You find the medicine you’ve been looking for, and the floor beneath you collapses. You’re stuck in this weird basement, your map isn’t working, and you’re not alone. That weird thing you saw before, it’s there with you, and it’s unlike any of the enemies you’ve fought before. Just like that, you’re just as scared and freaked out as before, you’re not thinking straight, something is after you, and your afraid to die down there.

This whole scenario, the entire section in the nursery is incredible, I can’t believe how good it is, and how scared it made me.



Sections where pad doesn’t work. Keeps areas in the dark.

The game has a tendency to do that, get you used to something, and then just like that, take it away from you. Like when they teach you how to use the bat to kill zombies without spending ammo, but then they throw enemies with helmets at you which need to be knocked off, and it’s impossible now to take out a whole group just with the bat. You’ve gotta use your guns to save time because they’re backing you into a corner.

What happens most often though is they’re disable the pad in certain sections. You’re exploring the deep underground, there’s a long dark corridor ahead of you carrying the moans of zombies, and then uh oh, the pad stops working. Now you can’t get a fix on them with your radar or take a look down the path safely with the nightvision on the screen. There’s no visibility, and to take a look, you’ll need to turn on your flashlight, but that’ll attract them all, and you don’t even know how many there are. This section was the first that forced me to use my shotgun, because I really didn’t know what else to do, and I was scared because the radar I was told to rely on was now offline.

Another thing that makes the game great is it’s use if visual effects. Yeah, okay, the WiiU isn’t the most powerful console on the block, but dang does this look good. This great atmospheric lighting, lense flares and smudges add so much to the atmosphere, you forget how goofy some of the enemies look. The textures, blur, and camera effects makes the environments, made up of pretty simple geometry, look crazy realistic, and it’s great.

Something else that helps atmosphere
(spray paint messages like darksouls)


Now, like I said, the game isn’t perfect, so quickly I’m going to go over some things that disappointed me.



So quite a while ago Mr Martin over here sends me a tweet that I may or may not dig up just to put on screen here for a second, but anyways, he’s tells me “heeeeey “I know you’re into what’s AI shit and bots and artificial partner systems in games what with your critically acclaimed videos on the subject spanning from exactly the resident evil series all the way to this one Medabots game. So hey maybe you should check out Final Fantasy 12, I think you’ll like it.”


I looked into the game and it’s reviewers and critics and immediately became familiar with exactly why it was recommended I take a look. Martin, thanks to my friend we have gathered here today.

Now let me for a moment get real, you know take myself seriously for a moment, drop this air of self-flagellation I kind of keep around for videos. If you’ve been around for a while this might be boring, I’m gonna go into a little bit of a self history lesson here which turns from my side is quite important cause there’s always a lot of new people coming here who don’t know what I’ve been up to or what I’ve been talking about for the past 3 freaking years. So, here we go.

In my relatively short time making the sorts of videos I have made on this website I’ve been come to know as “the guy” of a few different things; for instance I have for a long time been “the spongebob guy”, a title I got for making what were, at the time, some of the only … ooOOOooooh I wanna say above average videos on these then old and now older spongebob video games. I’ve also been associated with such series as Resident Evil, one of the few subjects prevalent in both pre and post renaissance eras of LambHoot. But more recently and more importantly however Pikmin. It’s easy in this space to couple yourself to people interested in certain games or discussions of them by simply covering them consistently, as I’ve learned.

Something harder to do though is tie yourself, as a creator or artist or writer or video maker, to a subject or thematic identity. The intelligence behind youtube’s search and recommended features isn’t tuned to that sort of thing just yet.

Despite that though something I tried to do a lot in the past and slowly seemed to have abandoned nowadays was what got a few folks out there calling me not the “spongebob guy”, not “the resident evil guy”, not even “the mexican guy” fuck do you guys remember when people thought I was mexican? That was like, that really kinda made me feel weird. Like, what, do Americans just assume that anyone with any sort of noticeable ethnicity must be mexican? Jesus Christ... Anyways. That thing I used to do is what got me called “the diagram guy”.

Here I was, hot kid on the block half-way through a SoEng degree, just learned me about state machines and what stands to reason IS the most powerful language, UML. You pick up the Unified Modeling Language and suddenly everything looks like a design spec ah?

So that’s what I did. Partly fueled by my passion for my set-to-be profession and that of favorite hobby PLUS feeling underrepresented in the game critiquing space at the time with most video guys hitting the artistic side really hard but barely scratching the surface or frankly even being able to talk about the inner workings of these things, ouf. I came at this with an agenda. I wanted to be one of the first of my kind. I wanted to explain really complex problems and equally complex systems built to solve them in a digestible way with high energy like a combination of the sorts of videos about games people were already watching and the performances of some of my best university lecturers. I want you to know that I have stolen certain mannerisms and expressions from my professors that I identified as things that helped me follow along in class. I’m plagiarising my profs dude. No this is beyond plagiarism, this is identity theft!

And yeah, one of the things I hit real hard with was diagrams. A lot of UML for general stuff but what was a best hit was the state machine. See, state machines are really fucking simple to plot and simple to read. It might be hard for someone who’s never thought of it that way to picture how objects and classes are broken down hierarchically, but states and actions and conditional triggers? People dig that shit man, it’s like flow-charts ++. Famously, by my standards, I formalized the entire behavior of the bot partner from Resident Evil 5 to make the point that it could be done as an exercise by any player of the game and that knowing its exact behavior imposed limits on the human player of the game. Infamously, also by my standards, I built a state machine representing the entirety of the game Five Nights at Freddy’s to prove that I didn’t poke holes in the game because it came pre-poked. I used it to critique the underlying logic of the game and expose how a bug I had less than a 0.2% chance of experiencing had no reason to exist and persist across every game in the series up to that point.

These were fun videos to make in my opinion and people’s responses to them were really good. It was clear that I was hitting some niche that people didn’t they wanted which was that of explaining highly technical processes and using formal methods and reverse engineering practices as a part a game’s critique and analysis, coming from someone with, yeah, at this point I can say, authority, specialization in this sort of stuff but keyly without the sort of dull monotone delivery you’d expect.

But I think sometime around my Breadth and Depth of the Wild videos I realized that there was a limit. I was stretching hard to make very abstract mathematical bullshit accessible and entertaining which was received by a lot of people as being a very condescending articulation of stuff that didn’t really matter.

And so that  realization was the usherer of what I’d like to call the Pathos Ethos era of LambHoot. Basically what I progressively started doing was still applying the same sort of analytical mindset given to me by my school and profession, but I was framing that with bits and pieces of myself, my personality, my experiences and feelings. It was a readjustment of the scope of my breakdowns, initially targeted at specific components of games, now instead my aim was to perform such a breakdown of my own feelings towards these games instead. This might sound like the same kind of process, but if you’re someone who works similar kinds of written video projects like I know many of y’all are, you know there’s a distinction here. My best example of this at this point is my latest video on Pikmin 3, I think that’s the best job I’ve been able to do at that and I’ve happily proven myself my adaptability, that I can pivot and learn to do new things.


But, still some of my initial motivations for my original style hold true. The disciplines of computer science and software engineering are highly underrepresented in the hobbyist critic space, probably cause they’re very busy… I can definitely understand that given my fucking experiences! And still, when people do manage to effectively communicate really complex technical topics, holy shit does everyone go wild. Like, fuck, you know how many video makers  out there have backgrounds in psychology and how interesting their works are? There’s something so special about listening to someone with an expertise in something apply that to a game in the form of an essay, and what I’m saying is that for as fucking critical as software is to games, it’s a shame that you don’t see as much of it coming up in analysis. I wanted that to change and I still do. I don’t want the only place to get cool technical content about games to be straight from the horse’s mouth via things like gdc talks and crap, and also don’t like seeing this growing problem in the critic space that is a misunderstanding of how software works and, more importantly in my opinion, how software development works.

Fuck, okay, back on track. What I wanna say here is that yeah, I’ve stepped away from an approach to dissecting games that I felt I could uniquely do and so had a lot of value, and I did this in favor of something I’ve come to enjoy more, I would say. But I think the real problem was that it just turns out not EVERY game warrants that sort of scrutiny. Some though do, and when it comes to those sorts of games, fuck man, let me be the diagram guy for just a little bit. I’m making the decision to bring it back when the discussion warrants it and the topic ai partners and bots certainly does. This is something I think I can offer some unique input on that nobody else in this space would and so I have to thank my boi Martin for affording me this opportunity to look back where I’ve come and where I am and recommending me a game honestly, context-considered, has in me awe. And right before we go into it, I’d like to invite anyone to anytime recommend me games like this they think my input would be valuable on. Let’s begin.


And with that time to take my first shit. Final Fantasy 12 actually is not a game with an ai partner system. Rather it’s a game with an ai party system where you can take what I’ll call “partially” direct control over any one member at a time, designated temporarily as the leader. What this control amounts to is really just their walking. All other actions can be handled automatically by the game’s systems and manual control can be used to override that, but that manual control extends to all characters regardless of who the current leader is. In other words, while “in control” of one character, the actions of all others are still available to be overridden which is only possible because while the game may present the illusion of real time combat, what’s actually going on here is a non-traditional interpretation of a turn-based fighting.

The way it works is that instead of a traditional turn, each character and enemy has a move timer of variable length depending on your typical rpg stuff like speeds stats and buffs. The characters queue their moves, and every time they complete an iteration the move at the front of the queue is executed. So like I said, what feels like realtime is really a reinterpretation of what a turn effectively is to you and your enemies in a turn-based game.

Now you might be wondering well, how does that work? You might have some experience in party-based turn-style combat from other rpgs, something I can capture some footage of? How about a Pokemon double battle? And if you do you know that the skidamarink of that rinky-dink is that each turn you issue commands to each party member one at a time, then in the action phase, each member of your’s and the enemy’s parties perform those actions one at a time, the order determined by some measure of speed of each character. So knowing that you might be wonder how the heck that works in an rpg game that I just described as having all turns from all active characters constantly iterating on real-time timers in parallel. If everyone is constantly fighting, how do you control them all at once? When does the game stop and give you a chance to issue commands to each member of your party? If actions are queued up and executed in order, how do you add things to that queue?

The answer is you don’t really. You don’t need to constantly command your characters in Final Fantasy 12 because each one is automated for you, each one is a bot and their ai or behavior is controlled algorithmically… which is why I was recommended it. And if past experiences with such bot systems is any indication, this might not be a good thing...


How bout we take a break for a minute and review what we’ve learned so far in our study of automated partner systems in games to see why it's such a delicate topic.

Resident Evil 5 is a bit of a weird case-study because rather than being a game built from the ground up with an ai partner, it was a game that was meant to be experienced in multiplayer with another person either splitting the screen or joining your session via network. An ai was built for the sole purpose of being a last resort, a catch-all for any player unable to get either of intended experiences to work. However the problem with that bot’s design specifically was that it didn’t behave as an agent with bare minimum amount of impact on play. Rather, unlike a human, the bot’s strict following of its coded rules, depicted here in this state machine, meant that a human player playing with the bot would have to adapt themselves to it in order to have a decent experience. The bot would not fallback on the human for guidance, rather the human had to play carefully and be sure to step within the boundaries of the bot’s rules.

The classic examples include weapon and health sharing. The bot was programmed to automatically heal themselves or their partner if their health went bellow max while they were in the cover state. This would frequently result in the partner inefficiently wasting health items on minor injuries rather than letting damage build up before spending them. The impact this had on a player was that they would need to stockpile health items themselves and not let the partner have any. With a limited inventory space though this meant that the human player would then not have enough room to hold items they were actually interested in holding, often cool weapons.

Speaking of weapons, the partner’s general combat strategy wasn’t up to snuff when it came to playing a, you know, resident evil game. For instance the best way to use the underpowered but high capacity machine gun was to shoot an enemy in a weak spot like the head which would create an opening for a melee attack, then quickly close the distance and perform that melee attack. It was the most efficient way to use that weapon both in terms of ammo consumption and damage output. The partner however would just empty clips into enemies. In the player’s hands each shot held more value, it was equivalent to a shot and a punch, but in the bot’s hands shots would be wasted quickly and lost forever to a garbage behavior. For this reason, in the early game, the human player who paid money for this game was basically forced to use the machine gun themselves and handoff instead the much more appealing shotgun to the partner which they still used inefficiently but who’s slow rate of fire mitigated that.

Resident Evil 5, omitting a single-player version of itself without a partner and including only one so easy to breakdown and so unwavering in its sub-efficient behavior changed the experience from being a cool action-oriented zombie romp through africa with a partner to forcing you into the shoes of a sidekick to the real star of the show, your supposed ai servant become master.

The issue was that creating a bot so exact in its behavior meant that the only way for a human player to be a good teammate to it would be to follow their own exact behavior, and that was not good at all. The partner was always dependable to do a certain set of things which meant that you couldn’t play the game however you wanted to play it.

It’s no surprise then that when it came to the 6th Resident Evil, the single player ai partner system was turned into something non-committal. Unlike with a real human partner in this game,  the ai partner’s health was infinite, their ammo was infinite, their inventory was not managed, weapons didn’t need to be shared, and very importantly noise was added to its behavior to prevent it from being entirely predictable and also abusable. Despite now having unlimited resources, its attack state’s rate of fire didn’t constantly max out like it did in the last game where you actually were sharing ammo. You can’t force the partner in RE6 to play the game for you but it’s also not something you need to depend on for anything. It doesn’t get in your way, it doesn’t hamper the experience at all, it does little more than just let you know its there. And its minor unpredictability makes impossible to reverse engineer and feel more alive than ever.

Key note here: while the playing experience benefits from this, the bot itself hasn’t improved. It hasn’t progressed like you would’ve hoped and expected. Instead all things that were seen as pain-points about it in the last game where patched out, so technically it's just a conceding of RE5’s partner’s crap effect on the single-player game. But when it comes to games like this which at the end of the day are entertainment, it’s not always about improving the built solution It's never that way in any context of software development. It’s about reverifying the requirements and realizing hey shit, this was never actually what a player needed in order to have the closest experience to playing with a real human partner. So let's not waste any effort improving that, instead we have to build what we should have done from the beginning which turns out is a subset of what we ended up doing in the first place.

Now all a that kinda makes the whole pursuit of dependable ai bot companions and partners in games seem hopeless, fruitless. But as we’ve learned from Medabots for the gameboy advance, that’s not actually the case. In a different context and under a different implementation, such strictly defined ai companions can serve a complimentary role to a player’s own agency. In this game for instance where each fight had the player bring in a partner to face any enemy captain with their own partner, the partner’s behavior set, though explicit at all times could be cycled through a set of available behaviors sets. That’s a whole lot of sets. What this allows for is for the leader of the team to select, before a battle begins, various predefined conducts they would like to have their partner exhibit, and then on the fly cycle through them mid-match to best compliment their own demeanor. For example when injured and in need of immediate assistance a player could force their bot partner into a non-combative, evasive healer-style, then once repaired you could issue them a partner-hunter behavior which would have them focus their offense against the enemy partner while you could take the leader. That’s a pretty shallow example, in reality the granularity of possible behaviors you could give your partner went as far as things like having them focus attacks on a specific body part of specific opponent. These commands, or rather like I said before, behavior sets were not meant to just cover general use. This was a fighting game after all, there was strategy to be found in the selection of behavior sets to take into each fight to best counteract your opponents stats and weapons and yes, even their own toggleable behavior sets. These behaviors were treated as any other integral part of the game, just like weapons or specials they had to be unlocked and equipped as parts of loadouts and I don’t think I need to explain why that’s such a cool thing.


So that brings us back here to Final Fantasy 12 and it's Exactly Defined AI Party Members, which as an aside is certainly gonna be the name of new 90’s style europop band. So far though unless made up for with some sort of controllability, rigidly natured bots in such long adventure type games don’t seem to make a lot of sense.

Like we learned from RE5’s partner, a bot’s behavior in this type of experience should be stuffed with enough noise that it can’t be exposed definitely or reverse engineered simply through long sessions of play and exposure to it. Otherwise, a bot that can be known inside and out is one that forces the player to adapt to it and this ruins the game and yada yada... Except there’s one case where this is acceptable. There’s one variable here to consider that in its presence makes it totally fine for a game to effectively present it’s ai’s blueprints and schema to the player and say “hey this is exactly without question how these bots behave”.

It is acceptable for a bot’s exact behavior to be knowable to the player only when it’s the player that designs that behavior.

Maybe though it's about time we actually talked about those exact definitions of behavior that each party member in the game has. Similar to the way it was treated in Medabots, character behavior is a founding member of the play of the game. Accessible from the same menu as things like weapons and items, behaviors, or as the game flavorfully names them, Gambits, are the laid out instructions that every member of your party follows. And if you’ve ever even barely had a glance at an introduction to any sort of programming, and you’ve never played this game, you know exactly what the fuck this is and it’s probably blowing your mind that this came out 13 fucking years ago.

And, and you’re also about to wince real hard at this next part, but fuck, okay? You know it’s really easy to call me out for over explaining things, but you’re not me. You don’t have the same perspective on my viewership as I do. Look, I know my audience, and most of them, most of you, are, with all due respect, with all due respect... idiots who only care about this one cartoon with a talking sponge. So judging for this you probably don’t know very much about anything and you probably have terrible taste in not anything in particular but in everything in particular.

So you’ve probably watched at some point a movie or tv show or bless this generation, a youtube video, where on the topic of computers someone said something along the lines of “oah it’s all a bunch of 1’s and 0’s” and you probably thought of the ratio type numerical values 1 and 0, and that’s not what the fuck that is.

In the sense that its most often used, 1 and 0 are actually short hand representations of not the words but rather the concepts of true and false. Why’s it 1 and 0 instead of T and F? Why don’t you imagine writing a few dozen of these out on an exam paper and you tell me.

See 1 and 0 represent what is the smallest possible unit of information in a world where everything is information. It’s called a bit, and it's described as being binary because it can either be one thing or another. In the case of computers this is implemented physically with electronic devices capable of two states: running a current or not. Being On or Off. A bit in a computer may be the answer to the question “does a current exist?” Yes or No. True or False. 1 or 0”.

And even though very small and absolute, abstracted you can see how quickly more can be made from it. If you give us something that can be either true or false, we can take that and line a few of em up and make up some cool rules that allow us to represent mathematical numbers with them. Then we can take these numbers and combine them in some way that we agree certain combinations represent certain letters or keys on a keyboard or other characters. Then we can take these and again following some rules we make up and all agree to follow that we bundle up maybe into two camps titled semantics and grammar which together we call language, and now we have ways of creating meaning through words, sentences, or in the case of programming languages, variables, functions, classes, methods. Languages, programming and natural, allow us now to describe as close we can the most abstract form of information we have access to, raw thought. As we think things we can use language to communicate those things in real time by speaking sentences made of words made of letters and punctuation. And then we can write programs made of elements made of characters to listen to those sentences and transcribe them. And then using some new form of information also constructed from a series of expansions of binary data we can somehow represent values of time, and then can find a way to link words in sentences to points in time using audio data, also coming from some sort of binary data. Then we can come up with a way to display these symbols on a screen with white font which is just binary data determining if a pixel should be white or not. And then we can, using these time links words and this method of display them on a screen, show them as they are spoken over a video which is a combination of frames of still images and that audio data from before. And images, those are just arrays of arrays of color, they’re just lists of colors we’d to have display one line of a certain resolution at a time to make a big rectangular shaped picture because that makes it easier for people to read. And given that we already know how numbers can be build out of strung together bits, it should be no surprise that given that any color can easily be represented by a scale of numerically measured intensities of red, green and blue, then it’s very easy to see how that can come from binary as well.

And so all the way from a machine asking itself whether or not there is an electric current, we’re here now where I’m asking myself why I’m listening to two smelly bums from different parts of the world talk about Sonic music.

Novacanoo: “And Sonic, like Crush 40 Sonic music, I love that stuff. And he, and Fantano seems to see it as lower quality music. But I just think its really fun.”

Zac: “Interesting.”

True and false, aside from being words you hear thrown around alot at a… child custody hearing… what the fuck was I thinking with this joke?

True and false, aside from that stupid joke are valuable as concepts on their own. We don’t necessarily need to build all sorts of things out of them to make them useful. Bits or truth values are to different kinds of logic, which yeah there quite a few, what numbers are to kinds of math.

In propositional logic for instance which sounds like something boring and complicated but is actually something guarantee you already quite a bit about, propositions are statements of truth that can be evaluated given the right circumstances. For instance I can’t evaluate the truth value of the proposition “the store is selling popsicles” because I don’t have enough information. But if you tell me that “if it is hot outside, the store will sell popsicles” and that “it is hot outside”, then I evaluate the statement. Given that it is hot outside and that if it is hot outside the store will sell popsicles, then true, the store will sell popsicles. And that’s the basic of the most basic type of logic math.

I’m gonna move on but here’s a little test if you’re interested. Try to evaluate this same problem if I tell it is not hot outside? What do you think the outcome will be and why? Lemme know in the comments if you want, aaay.

So what the fuck was the whole point of that whole big binary breakdown before? Well, I want to get across that even though in most cases when you hear people talk about “1s and 0s” in relation to computers they’re referring to how ultimately everything gets compiled down to binary data and that’s really interesting, this concept of true or false also plays a role as is in programming. In things like the manipulation of logic and evaluation of logical propositions.

If you’ve dabbled in programming you may have heard of something called an IF statement. See in programs often you only want certain portions of code to be executed IF a certain condition is met or if the system is in a certain state. I’ll give you a web programming example, this is something pretty standard, I’ve had to build this sort of thing before, but anyways. Your typical website might have some sort of account registration process and some features of the website should be toggled on or off depending on whether or not you’re currently logged in.

So for example if I’m logged in, features like commenting on and liking videos should be available and work as expected. But if I’m not logged in the page should either hide these features or in this case what youtube actually does is it prompts you to. This is a smart way of getting people to register for their website, but either approach is fine because it either removes or changes the behavior given the user’s current logged in state.

And these are things that are evaluated as the page is loading. Some people don’t actually know this but web pages are traditionally written from top to bottom and also loaded by browsers from top to bottom. So for example in youtube’s case, it might load the header, load the video, load its title, and then while it’s loading the like buttons, it hits a crossroad. If the user is logged in it may load the functionality for liking a video, but if they’re not it may instead only load links to the login page.


Now of course as we just saw, in programming you can divide paths of functionality across the true and false evaluations of such propositions. For example an IF statement is a great way to get certain code only be executed if that condition evaluates true but maaaybe given some circumstance you may want to run something else in particular in the exact opposite case. This is all just logic stuff. And then of course when paired with one of the other common practices in code, iteration or looping, you can build some pretty powerful behavior.

Here’s an excerpt from something I’ve written, it’s a part of Ace Nickelback’s startup tasks where he builds and processes his vocabulary. If you don’t know, Ace Nickelback is a shitty discord bot turned twitter bot that I’m am 100% disapointed in.

Here all he does is, given a line of text, seperate that line into words and then updates his vocabulary with those words. As you can see I stupidly did not consider the case where the line would be empty and given this comment I left, someone must have submitted the Bee Movie script to him which caused this function to break. As a precaution I’ve added this condition which says if the line is empty, return, just stop.

If it gets passed that point, aka the line is not empty, it actually contains some text, then here’s some bullshit I don’t know what it does, but now HERE, here now is a loop. Basically what I wanna do is run the same code on every word in a sentence right? But this function needs to be able to handle sentences of different numbers of words right? So you’re not gonna sit here and hard-code one function for 1 word sentences, another for 2 word sentences, no no, that’s dumb.

So instead we re-run this loop for every word. In this loop, first we make sure once again that the word isn’t empty. That shouldn’t happen but I’m an idiot. IF our vocabulary already contains that word, we don’t want to add it again, right? That’d be redundant. We still do wanna do something, we wanna store that fact that the word appeared a second time. So instead of duplicating the word, we increase its count by calling another function I’ve written that assumably does its job.

ELSE though, and this ELSE let me remind you will only happen when the opposite of the IF happens, so in the case that the word we’re looping on is NOT already in the vocabulary. In this case we of course do add it to the vocabulary.

And that, ladies and gentlemen, is hopefully a half decent introduction to how propositional logic is used in programming to define conditions who’s evaluations trigger different intended behavior. A lot of people think of programming as a sort of straightforward linear scripting I think, but I hope this shows you that a lot of the time it’s more like slowly running through a sequence of events, evaluating our current state, and then writing in the behaviors that should happen when any decision to proceed differently is made. You’re typically not writing things that execute once, have one job and then complete. A lot of today’s systems are things that need to be always running.

Such as, excellent segue, gameplay systems! Like for example the hybrid real time turn-based action system of Final Fantasy 12. Now we have enough information to properly describe what’s going on here. So, turns we’re able to realize are just loops! Each player, friendly and foely has an ever repeating loop controlling their actions. The loop completes once every few seconds, but it’s what’s in that loop that’s most interesting.

In each action loop is list of gambits which are really just IF statements. Let me just say that again because that is a BIG deal, but this is a game that lets you write IF statements into your party members.

Lemme put that in gameplay terms. So like, a white mage you might wanna make your team’s dedicated healer capable of restoring people’s health as well as alleviate status conditions. In a normal game you’d have to issue those commands yourself but with this level of control you can write a set of instructions that handle this automatically for you. IF a partner’s health drops below a certain amount, heal them. IF a partner is inflicted with blindness, cast the spell that restores their vision. Then the way it works is that for each iteration aka turn, the bot will evaluate the current states of all partners and foes, stuff like health, statuses, other actions, etc, and then pick the best action to perform based on the gambits you’ve designed. You know, IF condition, do thing.

But it’s not exactly a state machine, plotting this out with a flow chart wouldn’t do it justice because what I wouldn’t be able to easily communicate that way is order or priority. State Machines are better for plotting switch/case models, evaluations of non-binary values, less determinate things. I won’t go into it but the idea here is that the order of the IFs here matters which is a way for you to prioritize actions over others. The way the loop works is it evaluates each of these conditions one at a time, but as soon as it hits one that’s true, it performs the associated action on the right, it doesn’t continue evaluating the cases below it. Kinda like how Ace Nickelback preemptively returns when people enter the Bee Movie script. So knowing that this isn’t a set of but rather a list, an ordered chain of conditions where one comes before and after another and that the first to evaluate to true triggers an action once per time boxed iteration, you can do things like set fallback behaviors to the back and put more important ones on top. If a partner needs to be healed, heal them first before trying to go cure anyone’s poison or blindness. If nothing’s going on just attack say the weakest enemy, but if an enemy is targeting our healer, attack them first. The order mattering lets you code in logic beyond just the conditions themselves, you see?

But then even greater than this, the fact that you still can at any point override gambits aka the automated action selection of a turn and have any character do whatever you want means you can write in high-priority conditions specifically to get triggered by yourself. For instance, one of my favorite set ups for tougher fights, I gave my black mage a condition for any enemies covered in oil to use a fire spell against them as this would do massive damage. Then in the middle of a fight that looks like its not going my way, I could commandeer the turn of any of my other characters who can use the oil spell to grease up the bad guys, knowing that as soon as this happens my black mage will stop whatever she’s thinking and blow fire up everyone’s asses. Fantastic. And so far I think I’m still in the early game, at the time of writing at least, so I can only assume how interesting things will get once I can perform a chain of 3 or even 4 gambits together across multiple characters to pull off massive automated offensive combos.


Now okay, so this is a great system and I’m gushing all over it but there’s gotta be a deeper meaning here right? I mean I wouldn’t go through the trouble of introducing so much dry comp-sci content for just that pay off right?

So having started the game one of the things I noticed about the UI built to handle the fancy cool gambit system was that it bore some similarities to a kind of thing you may have seen cropping up recently, Visual Programming Languages. Now technically these aren’t always languages, sometimes they’re just visual editors for programming that often boil down to glorified bracket coloring schemes, but the idea is that these things are used in a lot of programming education at highschool and even elementary school levels. They’re a good solution to the problem of programming syntax not always being easy to pick up. See for many people it might be easy to get into the mindset necessary to train to be a master coder, but actually transpiling raw ideas into letters and brackets and semicolons following different rules depending on the language you’re coding in, that’s a steep curve for many folks. These VPLs get by that by allowing users an accessible block-building type interface to create their programs. And of course as you could imagine, starting out programming is always much easier when there are clear goals set. So these VPLs lend themselves to gamification very effectively. The learning of working with logical structures and stuff like efficiency goes hand in hand gamey concepts like level completion and scoring systems, and it’s pretty dope a whole new generation of kids are learning computer science like this. It’s cool that they’re gamifying the process of learning how to make games. I just think that’s pretty cool.

I remember these things really gaining traction as I was starting uni so kinda a little late for me. When I was a kid we had similar type stuff for math but there’s only so much you can do game-wise with problems whose solutions are either objectively right or wrong, unlike programming. When I left my highschool there was no trace of computer science teaching going on at all, but I know from the few times I’ve visited and volunteered that now there is quite a bit  and I have to attribute a lot of that to the accessibility of these VPLs. And when I say accessibility I don’t mean just to students but to teachers as well. I mean it’s no secret that not every highschool teacher is an expert in what they’re teaching. Teachers are only experts at education itself, so unless they’re confident in they’re coverage of a topic it’s not something they’ll bother with. These sorts of visual programming games though, often developed by very credible orgs, empower teachers who might not have enough time to learn about programming in-depth to give their students tools and lesson material they can trust.

And I think this is wonderful and incredibly important because… for fuck’s sake the foundation of this stuff is actually not that hard and the earlier people learn, the better.

My first year of uni, my first lecture course ever, a class called mathematics for computer science, I sat in that class for half a year feeling like a grade schooler again. I’m in a jam packed class sitting there learning the basics of something that was not complicated at all, it was just stuff that nobody had ever formalized for us. I am not exaggerating when I say this but basic predicate and propositional logic is equivalent to counting with your fingers. You’re drawing 1’s and 0’s and solving little logic riddles and fucking drawing venn diagrams to solve problems, it’s baby shit my dudes. And one of the things I noted was that this is not something you could not teach at a high school or even a grade school level. Like, greater than and less than signs are more complicated than most of this. And going through this I kinda wished I’d learned it earlier in life, it would have been so useful to understand how logic could be formalized, like, not just for programming, just in everyday living. I wished someone really smart had sat down and developed a course for some instructor to give me in grade/highschool as opposed to, I don’t know, having 1 class a year called creative writing where you don’t actually learn any technique about anything you may as well just pick up as a fucking hobby if you like it, or fucking god 5 years of the same quebec history class but every year they teach it in a different chronological order like it’s fucking Pulp Fiction or something! “Oh shit dude, I get messed up in the timeline. I always forget, did the fur trade happen before or after they shoot the kid in the back of the car?”

Like, look, what I’m saying is that, fuck, you know that whole big binary tangent I went on before? Well turns out it's not a tangent cause here’s the callback: it’s kinda crazy to me that despite our proximity and dependance on software right now, that whole story isn’t general knowledge. I think software is important to understand at least a little because unlike some other applied maths and sciences, our in-depth use of it is unavoidable given our current lifestyles.

Like, the mitochondria is the powerhouse of the goddamn cell, right? And the joke is that this is something oddly specific that most people remember from school that they feel is useless in their daily lives when in reality, the more knowledge you can have about the world around you, the better, always. What I’m saying is that its upsetting that there’s no software equivalent joke like this. Because I think if there were, you know, some commonly known trait of computers and how they work, I don’t think it would be a joke or a meme. I think its utility would instead place it instead in the same category of mnemonics as something like fucking lefty-loosey righty-tighty.

I mean, I mean, this definitely doesn’t, like, escape the confines of, like, software developer meetings, but like, the closest thing I can think of to something like is like, you know, “reduce coupling, increase cohesion”, you know “you want low coupling, high cohesion”. That’s like, something I hear a lot, you hear people say that all the time. You practically chant it. But nobody else knows what that means, what the fuck?

Uh, so this is abrupt but I didn’t know how old this game was when I got it. I mean, I knew it was a remake but I really didn’t care, I was more interested it playing around with its gambit system. But then I played this one joke level where you’ve gotta run around town yelling at people and for some reason this was familiar to me but I couldn’t remember why. Until of course it hit me, this was the set up that Mega 64’s video, in which this dude runs around town yelling at people, was the punchline to.

And now whether or not I liked it now I knew exactly how old this game was, at least. I was really into Mega64 as a kid, I’m pretty sure one of the first pictures I ever got tagged in on freaking facebook, was, I was goofing around the halls with some friends wearing a Mega64 shirt. I loved their videos and they inspired me to start making my own but as it stands I look at those days as being far behind me. I’ve grown since then, I have degree and a career that I would have never expected to have back then. These photos are soon gonna be a decade old. Little did I know then or now, that this game I’m giving all this praise to today for introducing an innovative pseudo coding system for automated party member control in an rpg, this game spoofed by some internet comedians that I was wearing the shirt of, this game was already 4 years old when this photo was taken.

Forget the graphics, the story, forget that shit. If you just showed me the gambit system yesterday and said “hey when do you think this game came out” I’d have said “I don’t know, maybe 2012?”. And that’s what I was saying to myself for a while playing it, all until this one goofy level revealed its age to me. Given a point of reference in time for this game, remembering how old I was when I saw that video and how little I could have predicted about where I’ve eventually come in my life and how little anyone could have predicted about how technology and software in particular have evolved, pffffoo it’s incredibly impressive knowing that this game has always been just under my radar exposing players to such an awesome de-constructed view of its own systems that would one day have a future version of myself jaw dropped trying to explain this shit to a bunch of people over the internet come an hd re-release.

Fuck. Me. Games are sociotechnical systems and it’s sad to me that maybe the socio side of that equation wasn’t prepared to handle something like this at the time, but hey.


So for as impressive as Final Fantasy 12 is for reflecting almost perfectly a trend in computer science education close to a decade early and for exposing players to propositional logic, it still did this in a game. While programming, of course, is something fundamental on a certain level to games, typically it doesn’t find itself anywhere near the level on which player’s interact. Like we said it’s cool and all but it still had to work in the context of a game, so did it?

How about we take a look one last time at Medabots which is an example of a game I think handled customizable ai behavior in a game really well. The way they handled it here was by making it an unlockable. Just like how powerful weapons and robot parts would only be unlocked as the game progressed and the player proved they were of a skill deserving to wield them, ai partner behaviors would be uncovered as the player completed more and more battles. The game would start you off with simple weapons and basic selectable behavior for bots. But the better you got and the more battles you got under your belt, the more granular some of the commands you’d unlock would become. This was fair because when it comes to issuing commands to your ai partner, the more control a command gives you the more powerful it really is. So saving these for last left high-level strategies only available to you towards the end, again, just like weapons.


Gambits in Final Fantasy 12 are managed very similarly, though this is a Final Fantasy game so it’s hella more complicated. Gambits themselves being composed of different entities, a slot for the gambit to sit in, a condition for it to watch and evaluate, and an action for it to trigger, it only made sense to make each of these unlockable differently.

Gambit slots themselves are unlocked through character skill trees. This puts them of course on the same level of importance as everything else you unlock via skill trees. Things like health upgrades, abilities to wear and weird certain classes of armor and weapons, special abilities, etc. The fact that the game’s main character progression mechanism equates a single gambit slot all of these other things really sells you, as a player, their worth. I mean, something concrete like a new weapon class has a value that’s easy to understand, but a single new gambit slot holds so many possibilities. It can make the difference between being able to string together a list of actions or not, or alleviating your stress as the player by automating a healing task that takes enough time off your hands to manage your team better.

Now gambit actions, the commands that are given to your character automatically by gambits, those are unlocked for the gambits as soon as they’re they’re unlocked for the player. I mean, fair enough, this system’s supposed to be an extension of the players existing, not something different. The conditions though that trigger those actions, those are unlocked by purchasing them at gambit shops. Again just like weapons and gear and potions and everything else, gambits are sold to the player by specified merchants who deal in em. Just like you could go to a store and say “hey I wanna buy that cool knife”, you can walk into a store and say “hey I wanna buy the ability to listen to the event that an enemy or ally is in a particular state”.

For example you can buy the ability to listen to enemies that are disabled or silenced and then create high priority gambits with it for your characters where, when it's true, they attack that foe. Why would you do that? I don’t know, maybe sometimes when a battle is a little hectic you wanna prioritize all our efforts to remove one foe from the field. I can manually cast silence on them just to mark them and then watch all of my party members shift focus for a moment on that single enemy, take em out, and then return to their normal behavior. Or maybe I want to listen to the event where an enemy has a certain buff and then create a gambit for one of my mages where they cast dispel on that opponent to remove the buff. There’s a lot that can be done with this and it’s cool that it’s not all available at once but instead the game makes you buy these listeners.



What’s nuts is I get it, sometimes it tough to reconcile spending hard earned fantasy currency on invisible, intangible gambit components rather than weapons and armor. But then you use them in the field and you realize that often their value far surpasses anything, anything else you could buy. Often you’ll be in a battle and you’ll notice a certain pattern in your enemies and go “dang, I wish I had a certain gambit, that would really help me out here”. And so the next time you visit the store you remember to buy that gambit trigger in anticipation of it being useful again in the future. This game does easily what many other such rpgs struggle their worst to; it suggests that more important than any sword is a proper strategy that uses that sword.

And if that weren’t enough, and maybe something you might have gotten worried if you’re hearing all this for the first time, the gambit system isn’t a “one-size-fits-all” sorta fuckery.

You know most rpgs, a weapon is either objectively better or worse than other weapons. And elemental spells which might instead have a rock-paper-scissors trichotomy have installed cooldowns so they can’t be abused. There’s this idea that there are certain spells and weapons that, if you got em, you should be using them as soon as you can.
Gambits on the other hand aren’t like this. They neither abide by a one-size-fits-all or use-on-demand model. Gambits are more like something orbits around your preference, how you’d like to play. Gambits are a way for the player to formalize their playstyle, to write how they play into code and have their party execute on that playstyle. And of course, preferences and playstyles are something that change throughout a game, as time passes and new opportunities lends themselves to be taken advantage of.

Just like you can program with different goals in mind like time vs space efficiency or effectiveness or time to complete, you can build gambits for different purposes aside from the most efficient combat. For example, when I was running low on that in-game currency stopped for a minute and designed what I called the money making gambit setup. Here I’d have my nimble thief set to use his steal ability on any enemy at 100% health. Since enemies can only be stolen from a maximum of one time, this was a good way to ensure that he’d steal no more than necessary as a battle went on. As enemies would come into view he’d run off and steal from them, and as they’d inevitably take damage he’d no longer be interested in stealing from them because now enemy health equals 100% evaluates to false for each enemy. Then as backup I made a high priority gambit for my sharpshooter to use his poach ability on any enemies at critical health. His poach attack would, if it turns out to be their killing blow, reward me with an extra piece of loot. Together, these two gambits allowed me to automate the process of getting the most loot out of each enemy encounter without me having to stress a cell in my brain.

And that’s really powerful. I mean, I never liked thieves in rpgs because there’s something about asking me to pick a move on a turn that’ll have me always choosing to attack over stealing in the moment. When that stuff can be automated though, when you can remove the human element from the equation, you get better results and you still feel like you made the right decision as a player for planning ahead. It’s not anymore about performing a steal and getting an item during a turn but instead about writing the logic for an automatic and efficient stealing machine to operate by.

And as fucking cool as that is, I do have some unmet desires.

The game does more than enough by exposing any of the game’s internal logic, don’t get me wrong. But knowing that it exposes any makes me wish there were certain other things it did.

I wish for instance that you could write negations into the gambits. Like, if an enemy is not at critical health, attack them. That means if they are, don’t. Leave critically injured enemies to one my characters with a gambit that does target them and uses, say the poach ability to get the most out of them. It’d be great to be given this control to keep your party members from stepping on each other toes, it lets you design much more cohesive gambits.

I wish also that it went a step further and allowed you not only to control actions given states but trigger actions on the transitions between states. I wish you could control what your character does between, right before, and right after actions rather than have them just standing still and loop through their instructions. Right now I can’t write a list of gambits that would make my fighter whack a guy, run far away to heal themselves, and then run back in. Or maybe something neat like have allies stick close together if multiple enemies target them at once. Or just plain one that could make them circle an enemy between attacks. Any sort of control over movement between turns would have been phenomenal.

I also wish you could set multiple conditions per action evaluated with your typical logical operators like AND and OR. Or better yet, have a way to nest multiple gambits as sub gambits within a parent conditional. Like you know, IF an enemy is targeting me, IF their attack power is over 100, cast blind on them, ELSE IF their attack power is over 50 cast defense on myself, ELSE fallback to attack them. Shit like that would be fantastic. As is you can’t really get anything close to this.

And fuck me up you know what’s crazy? Enemies use gambits too. I wish there were abilities pertaining to enemy gambits. Like, special ways to reveal enemy gambits or modify enemy gambits. I wish there were ways like that to spoof the enemy and for the enemy to spoof you. For as much as they treat them like anything else in an rpg, there’s nothing close to buffs or debuffs on gambits. I wish you had to consider stuff like enemies straight hacking into your troops in designing your gambits. That’d be sick.

But here’s the thing though. All of these wishes depend on the thought that all of this underlying code is already there and they chose not to expose it via the gambit system. I might be wrong, I don’t know what it was like programming games 13 years ago so back then this may have been exactly how the ai was built, and so this may have been as much as could have been done. I just like to dream. I mean, none of this would’ve been impossible to include in an remaster/rerelease, just saying. Not that I think the effort required would’ve translated proportionally into sales, fuck I’m sorry I like to joke but deep down I’m a realist. Kill me.


I liked Final Fantasy 15 a lot and the seamlessness and noisiness of ai partners was really immersive and that’s good because that’s exactly what it was going for. But now I can’t help but imagine a more mechanically driven version of that game with it’s fluid combat system and an extended and enhanced version of the gambits from this game.

Final Fantasy 12 has been a fun game to look at for its implementation of a really unique accessible and, for the time, advanced programmable ai party system, which I keep saying but is partly incorrect cause that very descriptive title leaves out the fact that this is also gamified and treated just like any other property of your party. This is the only game I’ve made any sort of video on that’s impressed me on a technical level and touched me on a personal level so equally. This game exercises, I feel, parts of my mind I didn’t know I wished other games did. And it’s adoption of the methods for the sake of gameplay that are now being used in early computer science education gives me such fucking hope. Aaaaand that’s it. I think at this point I’ve wrapped up all the different narrative threads I’ve been knotting up throughout this video, and I think I did it all without mentioning Rube Goldberg even once. Fucking ha!

It’s like they say, you can’t program your nose but you can program your friends’ noses. Thanks for watching.


Hello and welcome to the endscreeeeen. It’s me, ya boi.



Wii U, for better or for worse, was a video game console. Unlike others before, it was founded entirely upon a gimmick. The console wasn’t just a console, it was a console AND a tablet. The reason someone might call it a gimmick is because this was kind of a trick, see it actually was just a console, a console which in addition to streaming a video feed through to your tv via cable also displayed video in the screen of a large wirelessly tethered tablet. Of course the tablet wasn’t just a screen, it was loaded with more features than minutes of battery life, but that’s not what matters. What matters is that this console could stand on its own and deliver gaming experiences, this tablet could not, and so it's a gimmick.

Now the console’s central user-interface gimmick cleared the runway for a few different gameplay gimmicks. The way I see it there are 2 classes of gimmick in games on the Wii U. There were the, what I’ll call View Gimmicks in which the secondary screen was used, as the name suggests, to display some manner of alternate or supplementary or mirrored view to that which was on the big-screen, the primary view. Examples? Stuff like maps or inventory systems delegated to the controller’s screen and accessible at all times to the player. Some more ambitious games would make use of the screen’s touch features for little mini-games. You’d see these sorts of View Gimmicks in a lot of single-player games. If you’d like to know more about this you can check my Zombi U and Pikmin 3 videos. Thanks for watching.

The other class of gimmicks were those that enabled what we call Asynchronous Multiplayer. What’s that mean? Well, you ever see synchronized swimmers? The idea that they do the same shit at the same time. What might be cool in the pool isn’t guaranteed to be cool on the Wii Ule though. Asynchronous multiplayer is more like a community pool, everyone’s doing their own shit, some people might even be shitting in the pool. I knew a kid one time in summer camp who thought he saw a toy at the bottom of the pool, so he grabbed it and turned out it was someone’s fat turd, and it disintegrated in his hand and then we all had to evacuate the pool.

Anyways asynchronous multiplayer as it was on the Wii U was about getting different players using different interfaces to play different roles in the same game, cooperatively or adversarially. You could have a game where one guy’s swimming, one guy’s the lifeguard, and another guy’s the one that’s shitting in the pool.

Now this wasn’t something new given this console, async multiplayer had existed before. I could and would and AM bringing up as an example the N64 game Perfect Dark’s counter-operative mode. But, the controller’s gimmick here made things different. Players playing the same game could play in fundamentally ‘other’ ways from each other given the different interfaces. The new gamepad and nintendo’s respectable insistence to make all previous Wii controllers forwardly compatible with the new console meant that here alone you could theoretically have a player using touch screen controls, one using motion controls, and another, probably your shitty cousin, mashing good ol’ buttons on a madcatz, somehow this ragtag gang of fuckers all playing together. It also meant you had to invest in a fucking bucket to store all your controllers now. Here’s mine. It's also where I store extension cables and printer ink. Thanks for watching.

Of the two classes of gimmick the one I cared more about was async multiplayer. That was the tightest shit. Also, rewinding the clock and putting this all back in context, View Gimmicks at the time were something that were already being experimented with, mostly through integrations between console type games and the extra screen everyone had in their pocket (or maybe they were just happy to see me) their smartphones. It's a shame I can’t capture footage of it since its been shut down, but there were once a set of companion apps for Ground Zeroes and Metal Gear Solid V that turned your phone into an always-on map screen. It was the coolest shit. Actually my first time playing Ground Zeroes was with that app, it was really awesome, it was an integral part of the way I played. You could do stuff like call in support and helicopter pickups and playback cassette tapes without having to enter the game’s clunky menus. I’ve read people citing their invaluablity for speedruns and shit, must be rough now that they’re gone. Anyways, all that to say the View Gimmick was something already on people’s radars... their radars on their phones… ha.


Anyways in comes the Wii U and in comes Nintendo Land, it’s launch title, and wouldn’t you know it out goes my Wii U for repairs cause it was defective and I had that bug where Nintendo Land would crash on the console on startup. Really ace launch we’ve got here on this bad boy eh?

Nintendo Land was less a launch title and really more a demonstration of the console’s concept. I know that sounds weird and ‘like the same thing’, but when you compare it to something like Wii Sports, it just doesn’t really feel like a complete experience.

So there were a handful of controller hardware focused single-player minigames exposing things about the new controller like the touch screen, the gyro, the fucking camera that makes you look so much like a moldy pale piece of bread that you re-record all your gameplay footage with a hood on because of how self-conscious it makes you feel. Anyways, all of those, are meh.

The real draw here were the multiplayer games. Finally, Nintendo’s put you in their land, gonna show you what this new console and this crazy controller are all about! And… yeah half the games are variations of folk games like tag and hide-and-seek.

To be clear I’m not debasing this, hide-and-seek is dope and no local multiplayer game I know had ever been able to get it right what with screen cheating and shit. Having a second screen didn’t just mean you could display multiple views to a single player, but it meant that a second player could have a view which was physically concealable from the other player, masking critical information about their position and actions among other things. This is the dopest shit and games like those included here in Nintendo Land, you know in particular that Luigi’s mansion game, this stuff was fire.


In total Nintendo Land had 6 multiplayer games. 3 of them, half of them, were each uncreative but very fun composites of 2 other gameplay systems at a time, one used by each player. So in Zelda player 1 used motion controls to perform sword fighting while the other player was assisting them via an on-rails shooter system. In Metroid a pair of players fought off packs of enemies, one as a third-person shooter with the sort of movement and controls you’d expect, and the other from the air controlling a hovercraft with controls not dissimilar to those you’d use in any other game to pilot a helicopter. And finally pikmin, one player was playing a beat-em-up, and the other was playing… well… pikmin. This one is the weakest of the bunch.


The other 3 of multiplayer games in Nintendo Land, the other half of them, the luigi one included here, were all just remixes of tag and hide-and-seek, as mentioned. So, much more creative than the others in the sense that these were not composites of game’s you were already expected to be familiar with, such a simple novelty wasn’t what these ones were about. These were games that you could not experience on any other platform, but still they kinda fell flat.

I mean, none of them were bad per-se but bar maybe the metroid one as an exception, none of Nintendo Land’s multiplayer games were interesting enough to stand on their own, as anything close to whole.

And for a long time, that was kinda the way it was for the rest of the Wii U’s library. Time to time you’d hear a little peep about some asynchronous multiplayer game or mode appended to an existing game, but more often than not every title for the system half-assedly implemented the View Gimmick. Nothing really came out that proved substantially what could be done as far as asynchronous multiplayer went on a concept console like the Wii U, the ease with which some of its groundbreaking titles later found themselves ported over to other platforms a testament to this.

Let me paint a picture for you of what it was like to be an owner of this machine at the time, sold on the revitalization of couch multiplayer and seeing none’a that. Faith was something you’d begin to lose. Nintendo and Chill? More like Hope and Cope. But throughout this all, 3 upcoming experimental games played the role of the light at the end of a tunnel, they stood to prove everyone wrong about this glorified ipad console. Star Fox, Project Giant Robot and Project Guard, all headed by Miyamoto, the man himself… you know when wasn’t destroying pikmin… were the 3 games that were promised to finally demonstrate the sort of play that could only take place on Wii U.

Fast forward to today. Giant Robot? It was cancelled. Star Fox? Let me put it this way… I bought Star Fox Zero specifically for this video and after playing a few levels I decided this was not worth playing again just to capture footage. I bought this game specifically to capture footage of it and I have decided not to capture footage of it. That’s a take.

Project Guard which eventually became Star Fox Guard, a stocking stuffer for Star Fox Zero itself… Star Fox Guard is, bar none, the greatest game on Wii U.


The game’s about defending a central point from enemies who traverse your base’s maze structure until all waves are defeated or you lose. Unlike other tower defense games which are often about strategy and automation, Guard puts you in the role of a security camera monitor and manual operator. The gamepad shows a top-down low-fidelity blueprint-like view of the base while the television displays an array of 12 camera screens with the active camera in the center. The active camera of course being the one you’re currently controlling, which it's worth pointing out, you can only control one camera at a time. The others, unless you summon them, will either remain static or be subject to manipulation by forces other than yourself. That includes things as simple as the elements on these dangerous alien planets, but also of course the enemies!

So the robots are cleverly split into two categories, attackers and distractors. Attackers are the ones who will enter the base and make way towards the center. If they reach it its adios amigos. Some of them have different characteristics which, as a player, you’ll need to remember to handle them effectively. For instance, it’s important to remember that one of the most basic enemy types requires 2 hits to kill, however after the first hit, his body is destroyed leaving only his head to roam, the issue of course being that removing that extra weight makes it much faster and also much shorter, and given the camera placement, pulling off a second shot might be more or less difficult depending on when and where the first one was made.

The game also makes good use of the gamepad here to ween you up its difficulty curve. The early levels teach you that relying on the radar to track enemy movement is a great way to manage things, but slowly they introduce special attackers who are invisible to the gamepad but visible on the camera feeds. Then of course once they’ve gotten you used to that they come up with guys who are cloaked to the cameras but show up on the radar. Those are just a few examples but imagine there are more.

Now of course, predictable attacker robots like this should be more than manageable with experience, I mean christ got more camera’s up in here than in Jake Paul’s house? Is that joke dated? Probably.

Anyways, that’s why while the attackers pose a threat to your base that an effective coverage can counteract, the distractors pose a threat to the effectiveness of your coverage. The distractors are all about fucking with you while you try to focus on the actual threats, and most of them are super creative. Anything you can think of in terms of fucking with the cameras, they do! From rotating them to look away from an enemy intrusion to straight blowing them up or airlifting them away, these distractor robots can cause absolute chaos and make it practically impossible to keep tabs on every enemy intrusion.

I don’t have a clever way to write this in, but one of my favorites is the TV bot which does that old movie trick where is hangs in front of the camera and shows a single static frame of a normal environment, the only way to tell of course is by trying to move the camera and seeing the view not change. This is, like, super fucking inventive.

As the game progresses and you complete level after level, you unlock new planets with new environmental hazards and new types of enemies to always keep you on your toes. There’s even some boss fights thrown into the mix which holy hell I would not have believed possible but damn, gotta give it to em, this shit works. The story’s like, meh. I mean, it didn’t have to be good. Who looks at this whack-ass console and goes “oh damn I wonder what kinda stories they’re gonna be able to tell with this shit” NO, no, this thing’s about making weird games my dude. And so while there’s a Star Fox story tacked on to Guard, is doesn’t detract from the core system driven experience this game is.

As a matter of fact, to spice things up you regularly unlock bonus missions for levels you’ve already completed which have nothing to do with the story and everything to do with creative challenges. It’s like VR Mission kinda stuff, like, “okay do the level but you only have 10 bullets”, or “do the level but you only have 1 camera”. There are close to as many of these as there are story missions which is awesome but also the reason I don’t wanna spoil any more of them. To me, this is the most valuable part of the game, they’re all really good.

Of course, this was a Wii U title so it should go without saying but there was also a level editor and online challenge mode. The editor itself and the peek it gives you under the hood of how the system manages swarms is not exactly what you’d expect and I’m not really sure I could accurately describe it. It’s like, closer to video editing than level editing if that makes any sense. And then the idea is that you upload your custom challenges to the network and other players can take them on for points.

Now here’s something you might be wondering having starred at whatever footage I’ve been throwing up here for the last few minutes. It’d be normal to ponder how the fuck any of this is manageable or fun. I mean, I’m the freaking guy what said Pikmin 3 was too stressful for me!

Well see I’ve left out a key piece of information about the way Star Fox Guard is played. Guard is, indeed, a local asynchronous multiplayer, a couch co-op game, but not in the way you might think given how this console launched. Unlike Nintendo Land where each mini-game’s concept was founded on unique players using unique controller interfaces, one of which had a secondary view embedded into it, Guard goes at this all differently. Instead of being about two players using two different controllers, it asks “in a two screen setup, does a second player even need a controller?” And that is a really good question to ask.

See, darting your eyes up and down between the tv and the gamepad is not good shit, it’s bad shit. Forget the cognitive lag introduced by context switching, just the time it takes your eyes to physically re-adjust focus between the two different distances is enough to make the experience unplayable. That’s what a second pair of eyes are for.

Now I haven’t been able to find a single official word about this game being multiplayer, I’m actually considering that the reason for that might be legal in nature, but given the game’s marketing imagery and the way they demoed it live at presentations, it’s very clear that it was designed, it was intended as a multiplayer experience which works as follows. One player on the gamepad keeps tabs on the map’s radar functionality to spots enemy activity inside the base. At the same time, a second player keeps tabs too watching the set of security feeds on the television. When player 2 spots an enemy on one of the screens, they relay that information to player 1 who then makes a decision based on camera positions as to which one to select via touch-screen to commandeer and use to shoot down the target.

[sample audio of two players communicating while playing]

There’s a lot to unpack here and I consider discussing too much of this spoiling the game mechanically, but I wanna highlight a few things that show the strategic depth here. First, I didn’t mention this before but as Player 1 you actually have a moment prior to starting each level where you get to move the cameras wherever you’d like on the map. As Player 2 though you don’t have access to that map or knowledge of those camera positions and so don’t have the same understanding of the lay of ground as player 1. So when player 2 signals a camera number to player 1’s attention, it’s up to player 1 to interpret that information properly knowing that it comes incomplete from player 2’s perspective. For example, one of the enemy types holds a large shield perfectly angled between themselves and the camera closest to them. So when player 2 communicates to player 1 that a shield robot is visible on a particular camera, player 1 will then look for that camera on the map screen and then mentally trace lines from the other cameras to pick one which would have line-of-sight on the exposed side of the shield robot if it were rotated. This is something that player 2 doesn’t have enough information to know is possible, in the same way that spotting the robot in the first place is not something player 1 would have been able to do alone.

And that I think is the idea, it's enough information hopefully for you to be able appreciate the game but also not too much that I’ve ruined it for you if you’re interested in picking it up. It’s a fantastic asynchronous multiplayer concept which is exactly the sort of thing only doable on Wii U, but what takes it well and passed all of the mini-games from Nintendo Land is the creativity in its level design and the way it progresses in challenge and its wealth of content, you know, like a full-fledged fucking game. The game is elevated by this stuff. Star Fox Guard proves that a whole, a complete game can exist based entirely on a gimmick. It is the best Wii U game.

In case you missed it, probably because I haven’t actually mentioned it here but one of my arguments here is that, if you own a Wii U you should own this game. Like, if you own a Wii U and you don’t own this game you are making a mistake! I’ve seen it used for less than 9 canadian dollars, you can get it new for 30, so in american that’s like what? Like 20 bucks? But again, if you do, please consider the unspecified multiplayer nature of this game. I am not lying when I say that, while technically functional, this game is impossible to play alone.

So big whoop you know? A critic as astute as myself can go ahead and praise this game as the best on a console a few years after the fact sure, but it’s not worth anything if nobody’s really talking about the game or ever has. Why, for as good as it is, did Star Fox Guard flop?



Finally it's time to reveal the meaning of this video’s title. So I bought this game like almost a year ago when I was in Wisconsin waiting for the boys to show, walked into a used game shop next to a coffee place and picked up literally the cheapest game which was this, and I said to myself “eh maybe sometime I’ll make a video called ‘Star Fox Guard: Too Little Too Late’, cause I mean, this game must’ve been a disaster for people to care as little about it as they do”. But then I played it, and after everything we’ve discussed here it should be clear that it wasn’t too little, it was just too late. It’s failure came from something external to itself, it failed for no reason having to do with it as a game.

See… games are sociotechnical systems right? What’s an easier way to say that? ‘People Make Games’, which side note is also the name of a great youtube channel you should check out, but also, sometimes the People who Make Games have a lot going on, they have a lot of conflicting or otherwise just different priorities and they forget how they may have originally planned for things to fit together.


A nice way to see how fucked things get is to lay out a timeline once it's all said and done. So let's do that and see what we can learn.


June of 2011 the Wii U is revealed and it's a big fucking mess. Somehow a single presentation alienates both casual and hardcore audiences and half the people still think it’s just a new controller for the Wii.

November 2012 the Wii U is released and nobody’s buying it. Here’s when stuff like Nintendo Land is hitting the streets, getting the sort of experiences promised by this console all up in a few people’s taste buds.

At E3 in June of 2014, well after the console’s release now, suddenly Miyamoto's showing off his weird experiments. Here’s where Project Guard and the other demos are first presented to the public and they look pretty cool. Lots of promise in all of these.

A year later at E3 2015, during the digital presentation, Star Fox Zero alone is the focus of the day, nay, Miyamoto decides that we are now living in The Year of Star Fox. And that’d be great and all if it weren’t for something I left out.

March of 2015, 3 months before E3, the first mention of two little letters that would change everything. Nintendo’s next console, code named the NX, is mentioned for the first time on this day during a press conference where they also talk about their move to smartphone gaming. Star Fox Zero’s overwhelming presence during E3 is being overshadowed by media coverage of rumors and leaks about their next console that this game isn’t for. You can call it the year of Star Fox all you want, but you’ve put your furry little mascot on a ship you admit is sinking, ouch.

Another year passes, in the same month as the NX was announced in 2015, in 2016 Star Fox Guard itself is finally revealed to be the completed version of Project Guard. Details about how Guard will be bundled with Star Fox Zero are dropped too, overall its kinda being passed off as a lesser experience which is weird given how much better it is, but anyways.

Finally a month later, in April, Star Fox Zero and Star Fox Guard release together. 2 years after being first demoed and 5 from the console being released, Miyamoto’s cool experimental demo for the Wii U is finally out in people’s hands, and it’s a great time.

But like some sort of cork coming off under pressure, their release makes way for a total washout.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 days after the release of Star Fox Guard for the Wii U, a game need I remind you which was one of big boi’s first concepts for the console, boom, on April 27th with no new details about it Nintendo announces that whatever the NX is, it’s releasing in March of the next year, in less than a fucking year! That’s a deep fucking wound. Could use some salt though… oh yeah that new Zelda game for Wii U they’ve been working on, yeah that’s actually gonna not be a console exclusive anymore and it’s gonna be on the NX.

And the rest is history. In October they reveal the NX as the Switch, and finally in March, as announced, its released and everyone mind Hamish is playing Zelda on it instead of the Wii U.

Cool timeline eh? Here are some fun facts about it.

Star Fox Guard released closer to the release of the Switch than to that of the Wii U. A-fucking-GAIN, this was one of the games Miyamoto himself was working on to show people what his company’s new console could do… and it came out 5 years after it and less than a year before the next machine.

Forget the Wii U for moment, Guard itself released further from its own reveal than it did from, not just the reveal, but release of the Switch.

Why’d Star Fox Guard flop? Why doesn’t anyone talk about it? I mean, how could you expect anyone to? You need space, breathing room to generate hype, and mentioning a new console less than a year after demoing some experimental games for your last one is no way to treat them well.

But again, people make games and people have priorities, and so as soon as immediately after the launch of Wii U, the priority was Switch. That’s just how it was. The timeline of events surrounding key moments in Star Fox Guard’s development lifecycle were really unfortunate for it, but it wasn’t of high enough value. Being the best game on Wii U just wasn’t as valuable as being the first game on Switch, that’s just how shit flushes man.

It’s super weird that one of their first experiments for the Wii U was one of its last first-party titles, so am I saying that if it had released sooner, if say from launch early Wii U adopters had a full whacky gimmick concept game like this to sink their teeth into, am I saying that that would have changed things? Kinda.

I think that scenario would have given the console a much better change, but a lot of the reason it was failing didn’t have to do with its library. It’s marketing was malfunctioning, it took too much effort to explain what the thing was… no single game could have corrected that.

“Here’s mom.”

“We already have a Wii sweetiekins.”

“Here’s you. Wii U is a total upgrade MOTHER!”

It wouldn’t have helped make anything close to a dent on mainstream gaming. I think some families would have had some fun with it and critics would have had more incentive to talk it up free of discussion so soon of the next console. I think it would have convinced more people of the potential of fully asynchronous multiplayer games but I don’t think would have saved the machine.

Roses are red
Violets are blue
Star Fox Guard was great
But too late for the Wii U

Thanks for watching.



